3- The matter has been referred to the Full Bench on the question as to why a writ of mandamus can be issued to Respondent No.2 for removing the alleged encroachment without complying with the procedure prescribed under the law .
4- In Reeta Mishra &amp; Ors. vs. Director , Elementary Education , Bihar and Ors . , 1987 PLJR 1090 , a Full Bench of this Court has discussed as to when a writ of mandamus would lie .
the Full Bench relied on the decision of the Supreme Court reported in 1995 as per the decision of the Court reported in 1995 : “ 25A . a . writ of mandamus and the function being included in the phrase that the writ order is issued for giving and executing a writ order ; and not for holding enquiry and adjudication .
it is not in order to assert a legal right , but in order to enforce it .
a writ of mandamus can truly be claimed in the event any constitutional obligation is cleared and specified .
it is not to be granted where , in fact , before it is altered , the claim of the petitioner has to be first proved and adjudicated upon .
as in the instant case , the averments made on their behalf as well as the direct challenge to the claim of the petitioner on each aspect , have been sought to be quashed at every step .
it is apparent that the claim of the petitioners earlier has to be seen , adjudicated and restored .
obviously , this is not the scope of any writ of mandamus .
in the manner of extra - ordinary legal remedies , it has been stated that the office of mandamus is &apos; to execute , not to , adjudicate &apos; .
it does not ascertain or adjust the mutual claims or rights between the parties .
if the right is in doubt , it must be preceded in some other form of action ; there would be no mandamus to either establish and alter a claim on an indefinite basis .
it follows , therefore , that mandamus would not be granted where the right is in doubt . ”
the circumference and the nature of a writ of mandamus expressly spelt out in the clause of the health of Hebrew is equally imperative . ”
a mandamus is ordered to a very wide curative form , and having necessary to do any specific act specified therein , there is an order issued by a High Court to any person , corporation or lower tribunal concerned with the act and in the nature of any public liability . ”
the law on the ambit of mandamus in Cordus Zoris : “ … . a writ commanding an action that specifically makes law compulsory as a liability arising from a post , trust or place .
it is a proceeding to compel some one to meet any liability which the law imposes on him , and the writ may disprove the commission of any act , and may also order it to be done . ”
26- From the authoritative proposition of law , it is clear that for any writ of mandamus any statutory or public liability must exist which a devolution on the person or body against whom the writ is directed .
it is equally established that there is a corresponding right in the petitioners with it necessarily entitled to claim enforcement of the said statutory public liability .
unless both these conditions are satisfied , the very existence of the ground required for the issue of a writ of mandamus can hardly be said to be in existence .
applying both tests to the present context , I am of the opinion that none of the two ends meet .
learned counsel for the petitioners were completely unable to refer to any such statutory provision which imposed any statutory public liability to pay salary to the respondents , where the appointment of the petitioners could be forged , fraudulent or illegal .
equally , no such provision can be directed , which would vest in the petitioners a established enforceable right , to the relief which they seek to claim . &quot;
5- In view of the test laid down in the case of Reeta Mishra , a writ of mandamus is issued to order and execute , and not for enquiry and adjudication .
the question relating thereto requires inquiry and adjudication , that the respondent no . sattwa rights were injusticiable .
from 4 to 8 out of public land in isolation of the declared grounds , whether there are unauthorised occupants of any public land or not .
first , the legislative right has to be proved and thereafter , the question of enforcement arises .
6- A sufficient effective summary procedure for eviction of illegal occupants is established under the Bihar Public Land Acquisition Act , 1956 .
under the said Act , the competent authority has the power to investigate and decide and to order the eviction .
a writ of mandamus would not , therefore , be maintainable where any fact of unauthorized possession is required to be examined and adjudicated .
mere operation of a constitutional right that a writ of mandamus would be maintainable is not to establish any constitutional right .
7- Having so stated , it may be borne in mind that in appropriate cases to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court to compel the authorities to discharge the statutory liability conferred under the Act , it is open to this Court to examine the nature and extent of encroachment and thereafter check the nature of the land of encroachment .
the question of law is answered in the said manner .
8- However , since none is present on behalf of the petitioners , the writ petition is dismissed on account of non-prosecution .
Hon ’ ble egoistic Amanullah , J. vs. State of Bihar &amp; Ors . , reported in CWJJC No. 18297 of 2016 . decided on 17th March , 2017 .
Bihar Panchayat Primary Teacher ( Employment and Conditions of Service ) Rules , 2006 — Rule 8 ( b ) Recovery - Cancellation of appointment as Panchayat Teachers on the basis of age of 174 — It was necessary for petitioner to complete 18 years of age on the date fixed for it being a statutory provision — No relaxation could be made — Petitioner has no case to interfere with the impugned order , however , to act on that post which he was stipulated by petitioner . the salary / honorarium has been paid , it is not liable to be recovered .
advocate . - Mr . &amp; gt ;
ahavanuddin Ainullah , J. — Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the State .
2- The petitioner has approached the Court to quash the order contained in letter no . 1266 ( NIA ) dated 20.08.2016 by which service of the petitioner as Panchayat Teacher has been cancelled and order for recovery of salary / honorarium fixed under the Public Demand Recovery Act , 1914 .
3- The petitioner applied for appointment as Panchayat Teacher in Gram Panchayat Raj Amha in the year 2006 and after the counsel , she was appointed on 30.11.2006 , but later it came to light that the date of birth of the petitioner was 5.7.1988 .
since the selection process was initiated and the selection started and had been completed in 2006 , in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8 ( b ) of the Bihar Panchayat Elementary Teacher ( Employment and Conditions of Service ) Rules , 2006 ( hereinafter referred to as &apos; the Rules &apos; ) , a person was required to complete the age of the year of recruitment on the first January of the year of the year of recruitment .
in the case on hand , since the petitioner was only 172 years , his employment has been declared illegal and accordingly his appointment was terminated .
4- Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no dispute on facts , but by order dated 10.11.2009 the issue has been decided by a cojudicating Bench of this Court in the case of Baat Pama vs. State of Bihar and others ( CWJC number 18315 of 2008 ) , where it is held that even on the day of appointment the petitioner was less than 18 years , but in terms of the aforesaid Rule 8 ( b ) of the Rules , by the attaining the age of 18 years , such an appointment could not be cancelled .
learned counsel has also relied upon the verdict of the Division Benches of this Court , in the case of Anita Prakash vs. State of Bihar &amp; Ors . ( C.W.J.707 of 2010 ) dated 27.01.2011 and in the case of Smt . Rani Kumari vs. State of Bihar &amp; Ors . ( CWJJC number 15617 of 2010 ) on 29.04.2014 .
5- Learned counsel for the State submitted that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed as the petitioner admittedly was less than 18 years old at the time the application for post was made and also in terms of continuation of Rule 8 ( b ) of the Rules he had not completed 18 years on 01.01.2006 .
6- Having considered the rival contentions , this Court does not find any merit in the present writ petition .
7- It was admittedly required by the petitioner to have completed 18 years of age on 01.01.2006 and the employment being carried out on 30.11.2006 , he was required to complete 18 years of age on 01.01.2006 .
being a statutory provision , it cannot have any relaxation .
unless the said provision is revoked or repealed , the judgment of the coercy Bench in the case of Baharat Petama ( supra ) actually goes against the petitioner because in the said case the recruitment process was initiated in the year 2006 , but the appointment was made on 19.01.2007 and in terms of Rule 8 ( b ) of the Rules , he had attained the age of 18 years on 01.01.2007 .
more than that , in the case of Anita Prakash ( supra ) , the said rule relates to the appointment of a Shiksha Mitra , who was not governed by any statutory rule , is not at present a situation where Panchayat teacher has been appointed as per rules which are statutory .
moreover , the case of Smt . Rani Kumari ( supra ) pertains to the appointment made by the Management Committee of a private school and , thus , it has been held that at the relevant time , there was no statutory or mandatory requirement that any person had to complete 18 years of age for such employment .
under such circumstances , aforesaid orders have been passed by the co- come-
thus , in the considered opinion of the Court , in the aforesaid cases , the said orders of the Court are of no avail to the petitioner and at the cost of repetition the order in the case of Baharat Patma ( supra ) goes against the petitioner .
8- by so holding , though in the considered opinion of the Court , the petitioner has no case to interfere with the impugned order in so far as it relates to termination of his services , but in view of the fact that he has acted on the post for which he has been paid fixed salary / honorarium .
9- In view of this , the writ petition is dismissed setting aside the order directing the petitioner to recover a fixed salary / honorarium without interfering with the termination order of service of the petitioner from the post of Panchayat Teacher but already paid to him .
Hon &apos;ble Ashwani Kumar Singh , J. in Tribhuwan Kumar Mishra vs. State of Bihar &amp; Anr . Dig.29251 of 2013 . decided on 4th April , 2017 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 323 , 341 , 342 and 384 of Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 — Section 482 — Section 482 — Hence of injury , wrongful stay and intimidation — Order of summons — There is no explanation as to why complainant has failed to inform police or court with respect to first incident , as to why complainant has ever visited the police or upon failure of the police station to lodge an FIR . in terms of Section 154 ( 3 ) CrPC the essence of the charge was sent to the Superintendent of Police in writing and by post — intimation of the second occurrence was also given late in the complaint of which no explanation has been given in the complaint — If the coupon , certificate , signature on the stock register had already been taken , there was no reason for the petitioner to take the signature of the complainant on any such document — No reason to take such signatures of the complaint anywhere . not having been done — In a criminal case the defence of an accused is not to be considered at the stage of trial , however , while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC , if a libel , false , baseless complaint is filed under Section 200 CrPC , court may take judicial notice of any official letter written by a public servant to another public servant in an official capacity , particularly when the complainant has taken notice of , in spite of legal served of notice , wilful opted for non-contest of case — Object of inherent powers in criminal jurisdiction is only to prevent change of proceedings into a weapon of harassment due to personal and personal animosity submitted with motive for wreaking vengeance has been instituted — It would be an abuse of process of court to allow prosecution to continue — Impugned orders and criminal proceedings quashed .
advocate , Mr . informant , send or PRecherages , Chapter Generals , Mar . Karaarigar and learned counsel for the State .
2- In spite of legal served of the notice , opposite party No. 2 has decided to appear and contest the matter .
3- This application has been filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure ( for short ‘ Cr.P.C. ’ ) in order to quash the order dated 21.07.2012 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class , Chapra in the complaint case No. 613 of 2012 .
the order whereby a prima facie case under Section 323 , 341 , 342 and 384 of IPC has been made out , has been summoned to face the trial of the petitioner .
on 04.03.2012 the aforesaid complaint was instituted by opposite party No. 2 Dinesh Ram .
in the complaint , the complainant has stated that during the period between 2001 to 2006 when he was posted as Panchayat Secretary in Kadipur Division , the petitioner was the Head of the said Prdivision .
the Block Development Officer of Kadipur had instituted an FIR ( for short ‘ FIR ’ ) wherein the complainant was made an accused .
the petitioner had called him in respect of the said case and had obtained his signatures forcibly on various papers such as coupon , stock register etc. pertaining to the public distribution shop of one Bhola Sah .
the complainant further stated that he had informed the matter to the District Magistrate and Deputy Development Commissioner , Etah on 7.1.2012 .
thereafter , on 29th February , 2012 , the petitioner along with 4 - 5 other unknown persons had intercepted and took his signatures on the documents like re-coupon , validators , stock register etc . at the noof a revolver .
he was prohibited from lodging any complaint with respect to the alleged section .
5- After the complaint was instituted , the complainant was examined on oath and , in course of the inquiry conducted under Section 202 CrPC , three other witnesses were examined apart from him .
thereafter , after prima facie case was made out against the petitioner , an order of summoning was passed by the learned Magistrate on 21.07.2012 , which is under challenge in the instant application .
6- It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that the entire allegations made in the complaint are false and concocted .
the complainant himself admits that in pursuance of an FIR instituted by the Block Development Officer , Kadipur , he was made an accused and he himself came to the house of the petitioner .
he submits that the falsity of the complaint will be clear from the side of the complainant that when the signature of the complainant was taken on the coupons , validators , stock register etc. since 7th January , 2012 , again there was no reason on these paper to receive the signature of the petitioner or any other .
he submitted that the complainant himself was absconding in the aforesaid police case and since the petitioner , while living then , had not saved the petitioner from being prosecuted for his alleged act of omission and commission , therefore , he has been falsely implicated in the case .
he submitted that therefore , when the complainant himself was made an accused in the Police Case instituted by the Block Development Officer , there was no reason for the petitioner to obtain signature on any document , particularly when the petitioner allegedly is not involved in any of the offences .
7 . learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that there is no explanation as to why the complainant did not go to the police after the alleged incident on 7th January , 2012 or why did not file a complaint in the court .
he further submitted that even after the crime was repeated on 29th February , 2012 , the complainant did not immediately visit the Police or filed the complaint in the Court , rather , after abnormal delay , the complaint was filed on 2.3.2013 .
he submitted that the alleged complaint is only informative and has been instituted with para-i-motive .
8- Learned counsel for the petitioner has also referred to Annexure-2 to the present application which is a alleged communication dated 31.05.2012 given by the Deputy Development Commissioner , Chapra by the Deputy Collector stating that on the inquiry , the pleadings made by the complainant were found to have swayed against the petitioner .
9- On the other hand , learned counsel for the State submitted that the disputed fact cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of quashing a criminal case .
he submitted that prima facie case is made out against the petitioner , hence , the learned Magistrate has rightly summoned him to face trial .
he argued that the defence of the petitioner can be adjudicated upon at the very stage of the trial .
10- As mentioned above , though validly served , the complainant party no.2 did not appear before the Court and chose not to contest the matter in the background of the submissions made on 11.11.2012 , when I carefully perceive the facts of the present case , I do not find that there is no explanation by not taking it that the information of the complainant first incident which was alleged to have taken place on 7th January , 2012 was given to the police by the Court or he had failed to give it .
there is also no reliable evidence that after the second incident , the complainant had ever gone to the police .
or on the failure of the S.H.O. * of the Police Station to lodge the FIR , the substance of the allegation in writing was sent to the Superintendent of Police and sent it by post with the terms of Section 154 ( 3 ) CrPC .
further , the second incident of 29th February , 2017 has also been delayed to 02 . 03 . 2012 for which no explanation has been given in the complaint .
12- It is from the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that &quot; if the coupon stock register , etc. were already signed on 7th January , 2012 , there was no reason for the petitioner to re-sign any such pressure again on 29 January , 2012 .
the reason for taking such signatures in the complaint itself has not been alleged elsewhere .
the contents of Annexure-2 to the present application would also disclose that the Collector , forwarding , Chapra , in his letter dated 31.05.2012 , informed the Deputy Development Commissioner , Chapra that , on inquiry being made , the allegations made by the complainant were found to be false .
the efforts made to contact the complainant with regard to the allegation had also failed and when they tried to contact him on the phone .
her mobile phone was found closed .
13- This Court is conscious of the fact that in a criminal case , the defence of an accused at the stage of trial is not to be considered .
however , while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. , if a libel false , baseless complaint is filed under Section 200 CrPC , the court can take judicial cognizance of the alleged letter laid down by any public servant in an official capacity by any other public servant , particularly when the complainant has chosen to defer the case , notwithstanding the valid termination of notice , Section 482 Cr.P.C. the court is empowered to exercise its inherent powers to prevent abuse of the process of the court .
the inherent powers of criminal jurisdiction are meant to prevent the proceedings from being converted into a weapon .
15 . at this stage , it would be expedient to note that by a series of judgments , the Supreme Court has harmoniously given the principles relating to the extraordinary and inherent powers of the High Courts to quash a complaint .
it will be sufficient to refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal &#91; 1992 Supp . ( 1 ) SCC 335 &#93; wherein it was observed that for the following categories of cases extraordinary power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be exercised , however , while making it clear that it was not possible to provide a complete list : ( a ) where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint , even if the allegations were taken . and is accepted in their entirety , prima facie no offence is constituted against the accused or makes out a case .
( b ) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials , if any , accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence justifying an investigation by police officials under Section 156 ( 1 ) of the Code except an order of a Magistrate within the ambit of Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code .
( C ) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and an additional evidence in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused .
( d ) Where , the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence .
rather , only constitute a non-cognizable offence , an investigation is admissible without any order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code .
( e ) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of the same that no intelligent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused .
( F ) Where there is a clear constitutional bar in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act under which a criminal proceeding is instituted and / or where a specific provision providing for effective redress of the grievance of the aggrieved party is inserted in the Code or the concerned Act .
( G ) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and / or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with a higher motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to personal and personal grudge . &quot;
16 . keeping in view the materials available on record , I am of the opinion that the present criminal proceedings have been instituted with a motive to wreak vengeance on the accused on account of personal and personal malice and falls within the sentence ( e ) and ( g ) of Bhajan Lal &apos;s case .
17- In this view of the matter , it would be an abuse of process of the court to permit the prosecution to continue .
7- Learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that there is no explanation as to why after the alleged incident on 7th January , 2012 the complainant did not go to the police or why he did not file a complaint in the court .
he further submitted that even after the crime was repeated on 29th February , 2012 , the complainant did not immediately visit the Police or filed the complaint in the Court , rather , after abnormal delay , the complaint was filed on 2.3.2013 .
he submitted that the alleged complaint is only informative and has been instituted with para-i-motive .
8- Learned counsel for the petitioner has also referred to Annexure-2 to the present application which is a alleged communication dated 31.05.2012 given by the Deputy Development Commissioner , Chapra by the Deputy Collector stating that on the inquiry , the pleadings made by the complainant were found to have swayed against the petitioner .
9- On the other hand , learned counsel for the State submitted that the disputed fact cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of quashing a criminal case .
he submitted that prima facie case is made out against the petitioner , hence , the learned Magistrate has rightly summoned him to face trial .
he argued that the defence of the petitioner can be adjudicated upon at the very stage of the trial .
10- As mentioned above , though validly served , the complainant party no.2 did not appear before the Court and chose not to contest the matter in the background of the submissions made on 11.11.2012 , when I carefully looked at the facts of the present case , I find that there is no explanation by taking it that the information of the complainant first incident which was alleged to have taken place on 7th January , 2012 was given to the police by the Court or he had failed to give it .
there is also no reliable evidence that after the second incident , the complainant had ever gone to the police or on the failure of the SHO of the Police Station to lodge the FIR , had sent the substance of the allegation in writing to the Superintendent of Police and sent it out of post in terms of Section 154 ( 3 ) CrPC .
also , the second incident of 29th February , 2012 was delayed to 02 / 03 / 2012 for which no explanation has been given in the complaint .
12- It is force in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that &quot; if the signatures on coupons , validators , stock register etc. had already been taken on 7th January , 2012 , there was no reason for the petitioner to re-sign any such pressure again on 29 January , 2012 .
the reason for taking such signatures in the complaint itself has not been alleged elsewhere .
the contents of Annexure-2 to the present application would also disclose that the Deputy Collector , forwarding , Chapra , in his letter dated 31.05.2012 , informed the Deputy Development Commissioner , Chapra that , on inquiry being made , the allegations made by the complainant were found to be false .
the attempts made to contact the complainant with regard to the allegation had also failed , that and when they tried to contact him on the phone , his mobile phone was found to be closed .
13 . this Court is conscious of the fact that in a criminal case , the defence of an accused at the stage of trial is not to be considered .
however , while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. , if a libel false , baseless complaint is filed under Section 200 CrPC , the court can take judicial cognizance of the alleged letter laid down by a public servant in an official capacity by a public servant to another public servant , particularly when the complainant has chosen to defer the matter deliberately despite valid served in the notice .
14- Section 482 Cr.P.C. empowers this Court to exercise its inherent powers to prevent abuse of process of the Court .
the inherent powers of criminal jurisdiction are meant to prevent the proceedings from being converted into a weapon .
15 . at this stage , it would be expedient to note that by a series of judgments , the Supreme Court has harmoniously given the principles relating to the extraordinary and inherent powers of the High Courts to quash a complaint .
it would be sufficient to refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal &#91; 1992 Supp . ( 1 ) SCC 335 &#93; wherein it was observed that extraordinary power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be exercised for the following categories of cases , however , while making it clear that it was not possible to provide a complete list : * ( a ) where the allegations made in the first information or the complaint , even if the allegations were taken . is committed and accepted in their entirety , prima facie no offence is constituted or makes out a case against the accused ;
( b ) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials , if any , accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence justifying an investigation by police officials under Section 156 ( 1 ) of the Code except an order of a Magistrate within the ambit of Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code , where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any additional evidence against and against the commission of any offence . do not make out a case ; ( d ) where , in the FIR , the allegations do not constitute a cognizable offence .
rather , only constitute a non-cognizable offence , an investigation is admissible without any order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code ;
( e ) where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of the same that no intelligent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused ;
( F ) Where there is a clear legal bar in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act under which a criminal proceeding is instituted , in relation to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and / or where a specific provision providing for effective redress of the grievance of the aggrieved party is in the Code or the concerned Act ; ( g ) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and / or where there is personal concern for the accused for wreaking vengeance and for personal loss . proceeding with a forti-motive has been maliciously instituted . &quot;
16- Keeping in view the materials available on record , I am of the opinion that the present criminal proceedings have been instituted with a motive to wreak vengeance on the accused on account of personal and personal malice and falls within the category ( e ) and ( g ) of Bhajan Lal &apos;s case .
17 . in this view of the matter , allowing prosecution to continue would be an abuse of process of the court .
18- Accordingly , the impugned order dated 21.07.2012 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate first Class , Chapra in Gian No. 283 of 2012 is quashed .
consequently , the enquiry case no . 283 of 2012 and its entire proceedings are quashed arising out of the complaint case no . 613 of 2012 .
19- The application is allowed .
1 &#91; Full Bench &#93; Hon &apos;ble Hemant Gupta , Executive Chief Justice , Anjana Mishra and Sudhir Singh , JJ . Union of India and Others ( in both ) vs. Sanjay Kumar Rai ( in 163 ) L.P. No. 163 of 2006 and CR . No. 375 of 2012 . Arising out of CWJC Nos. 338 of 2003 with 5815 of 2011 decided on 24th January , 2017 .
service Law — compassionate appointment — Right to seeking compassionate appointment arises out of employer &apos;s policy — In absence of policy for compassionate appointment , there is no inherent right to family members of deceased to seek compassionate appointment — If a policy for compassionate appointment on compassionate appointment does not permit appointment to other wife and / or children on compassionate grounds , High Court will not grant a legal right to seek compassionate appointment on ground of right of intervention . and cannot order appointment on compassionate grounds on compassionate grounds of instructions and no compassionate appointment can be claimed or granted unless the rules governing the service do not permit such appointment , such appointments are strictly in accordance with the scheme governing such appointments and shall be contrary to the existing vacancies .
case laws . — 2015 ( 1 ) PLJR 945 - caste ; ( 1994 ) 2 SCC 718 ; ( 2007 ) 9 SCC 571 ; ( 2008 ) 13 SCC 730 ; 2015 ( 1 ) PLJR 945 ; ( 2011 ) 1 SCC 694 — Relied ; Gujarat State Govt . of Gujarat , Maharashtra State Govt . Swhether 775 , Financial Institutions ( in 375 ) , Financial And App 647 www . new . DLI . ERNET . in
Hemanta Gupta , Acting Chief Justice . -Heard learned counsels for the parties .
2 . on 22 April 2010 , the matter has been placed before this Bench in terms of the order passed by a Division Bench of this Court passed by this Court dated 14th July , 2014 questioning the correctness of the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court passed in CWJC number 2592 of 2007 ( Union of India through Eastern Railway and another Vs . Uma Devi ) , decided in the order that without permission of Railway authorities , the second wife was born on 24th January , 1992 . they are not entitled to seek compassionate appointment on terms of the circular issued by the Railways .
3- The facts leading to the larger Bench being referred to in the present are , in brief , that the writ petitioner had invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court seeking appointment on compassionate grounds after the death of his father on 18th March , 1991 .
after he attained majority on 7 April 1992 , an application for appointment on compassionate grounds was filed .
the learned Single Bench had allowed the writ application because his application cannot be rejected merely on the ground that he is the son born to the second wife of the deceased .
4- In appeal , the appellants relied upon a Division Bench order of this Court in the case of Uma Devi ( supra ) to argue that compassionate appointment can be sought and granted only in terms of the policies framed from time to time .
since the policy dated 24th January , 1992 specifically exclude the compassionate appointment to the second wife and her children , therefore , the writ petitioner will not be entitled for compassionate appointment even if he is a constitutional child for the purpose of the Hindu Marriage Act , 1955 or the Hindu Succession Act , 1955 .
the relevant circular was read as under :
matter : appointment on compassionate grounds - cases of other widow and her concomitant .
1 . it is made clear that in case of death of railway workers , including children born out of another wife , while leaving more than one widow behind , they can be shared by the two widows of financial settlement on account of their orders or otherwise on the merits of each case , the other widow and her children are not to be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds unless the administration taking into account the personal law etc . not permitted .
2- The fact that the second marriage is not permissible is fully explained in the terms and conditions suggested in the motion for preliminary appointment .
3- It has to be borne in mind and the other widows and the members thereof need not be forwarded to the Railway Board for matters of compassionate appointment .
4 . please give acknowledgement of receipt .
5- Apart from the aforesaid judgment , reliance is also placed on the judgment of this Division Bench of this Court passed in CWJT No . 19743 of 2012 ( Union of India and others Vs . Bishinda Devi ) , learned counsel for the appellants on 2nd May , 2013 , and the judgment of this Court reported as reported by Union General Manager , East Central Railway and others vs. Smas.Uma Devi and others , 2015 ( 1 ) PLJR 945 ) .
6- On the other hand , learned counsel for the writ petitioner submitted that the first wife has not made any property on the appointment of the writ applicant on compassionate grounds , hence , the circular as relied upon by the appellants would not be applicable .
7- We have heard learned counsels for the parties and we find that the right to seek compassionate appointment emerges from the policy of the employer .
in the absence of a policy for compassionate appointment , there is no inherent right to seek compassionate appointment in the family members of the deceased .
if a policy of compassionate appointment does not permit appointment to another wife and / or her child on compassionate grounds , this Court on the basis of right to succession will not grant a right to seek compassionate appointment .
this is so decided in the judgment reported as L.I.C. vs. Asha Ram Chandra Ambekar , ( 1994 ) 2 SCC 718 .
the Court held as follows : — In recent times , this Court is facing several cases which have been referred to by judicial authorities for appointment on compassionate ground .
we would , therefore , wish to lay down the law in this regard .
the High Court as well as the Administrative Tribunals cannot grant benefits , actuated by sympathetic consideration .
no doubt Shakespeare said in the Merchant of Venice : &apos; not the quality of mercy is impeded ; it goes down from heaven as a gentle rain .
the space below it is double - edged .
it makes him richer , who gives and takes it ; these words will not apply to all situations .
bending to instinct will lead to a tendency to ignore the harsh logic of law .
it must be remembered that &quot; law is the symbol of all wisdom .
justice , according to law , is an old principle like the hills .
the law has to be administered to the Courts as it finds it , however inconvenient it may be .
XXX
XXX 17 . thus , apart from being contrary to the statutory provisions of the reference made to appointment on compassionate grounds such a direction does not take note of the fact that in the judgment reported as State Bank of India and others vs. Jaspal Kaur ( 2007 ) 9 SCC 571 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court had held that the Court cannot order appointment on compassionate grounds against statutory regulations and instructions .
it held as under : —
13- Learned senior counsel also made the following submissions : it is well settled that the High Court , while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India , does not act as a Court of appeal .
the High Court had failed to understand that clause ( 1 ) of the Scheme provides that for identification of financial status of the family , the amounts paid in respect of marginal benefits , investments , income from other sources and the size of the family , etc . , need to be taken into consideration .
however , in the present case holding that the position of the family is not enough for the mere maintenance of the family , the High Court has failed to understand that the family of the deceased has been paid monthly income of Rs . 2055 / - per month and terminal benefits of Rs . 47,607 / - per month .
the High Court had also failed to appreciate the settled principle of law laid down by this Court in Life Insurance Corporation of India vs. Asha Ramachandra Abekar ( 1994 ) 2 SCC 718 that the Court cannot order appointment on compassionate ground against statutory regulations and instructions and that the trouble of the candidate does not entitle him to compassionate appointment against the statutory provisions .
the High Court had also failed to understand that the discretion of the appointing authority under the scheme of compassionate appointment was to be exercised having regard to the scheme and the purpose / propriety behind it .
it was submitted that as a matter of right compassionate appointment cannot be claimed .
above all , the public office is not hereditary .
the High Court had failed to notice the ratio in GM ( D &amp; P ) vs. Kunti Tiwari ( 2004 ) 7 SCC 271 where it was held that the criteria of economic distress is to be applied and only in cases where the family situation is without any source of livelihood and is cowed down with poverty that compassionate appointment is required to be granted . &quot;
VShivanshi vs. State of A.P. and others reported in ( 2008 ) 13 SCC 730 , the Court held that no claim for compassionate appointment can be made nor can be granted unless the Rules governing the service permit such appointments .
such appointments will be made strictly according to the plan governing such appointments and against the existing vacancies .
it was held thus : 18 . principles relating to appointments to compassion can be so formulated :
( a ) Compassion on compassionate appointment solely on inheritance is impermissible .
appointments to public service should be made according to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India , strictly inviting applications to be Open and on the basis of comparative merit .
though no other mode of appointment is permissible , appointments made separately in the interest of justice to deal with certain contingencies are a settled exception to the said general rule .
( b ) the two well-accepted contingencies which are separated as an exception to the general rule are :
( I ) Appointment on compassionate grounds to meet sudden crisis in the family arising out of death in the service of the bread winner .
( II ) Appointment on compassionate ground to deal with family crisis due to medical disability of the arbitrators .
another contingency , though less recognized , happens where land holders lose all their land for any public purpose and provides compassionate appointment to family members of persons affected by the project .
in particular , where under the law to be acquired , the law by way of compensation does not provide for market value and solatium . &quot;
( C ) Compassion on compassionate appointment cannot be claimed or granted unless the Rules governing the service do not permit such appointments .
such appointments will be made strictly according to the plan governing such appointments and against the existing vacancies .
( d ) The compassionate appointments are permissible only in the case of a dependent member of the employee concerned i.e. , spouse , son or daughter and not in the case of other relatives .
such appointments should be made only in the posts of inferior , that is , Class III or Class IV posts and should not be allowed to turn the crisis into a blessing by seeking employment in the first category or second category of posts .
( emphasis supplied ) 8 . in view of the decisions referred to above , we do not find that in the case of Uma Devi ( supra ) , prior to the need for a reconsideration of the view taken by the Division Bench in the case of Bishinda Devi ( supra ) , before parting with the order , we must necessarily examine that the General Manager in India , through the former Central Railway and others vs. Mst Uma Devi and others , ( 1 ) , 2015 , but in one of the decisions reported , the Division Bench has observed that if a Bench of coequal jurisdiction is unable to convince itself of any decision cited before it , it can certainly give its own judgment , but it cannot refer the matter to a larger bench of size .
the relevant passage from the said judgment read as follows : “ 9 . no doubt , it is true that recently the Division Bench had raised doubts about the correctness of the judgment of this Court in the case of Uma Devi and referred the matter to a Full Bench .
we think the context is not desirable .
if a Bench of coequal jurisdiction is unable to convince itself of any decision cited before it , it can certainly give its decision .
however , it cannot refer the matter to a larger bench .
there can be any justification to refer the matter to a larger bench leaving the matter for the Chief Justice by a learned Judge or the Bench before the two conflicting judgments delivered by the same benches , so as to enable a learned Judge or the Bench to resolve the matter .
that is not the case here . &quot;
10- We find that such tests are not cogent and are against judicial propriety which require bind down the past judgment to a Bench of coequal powers .
if the Division Bench has not agreed with the earlier Division Bench , the only route available with it is to refer to a larger bench but without the view taken by the earlier Bench , the view has to be avoided .
we may refer to a decision reported in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhatre vs. State of Maharashtra &amp; Ors . , ( 2011 ) 1 SCC 694 , wherein the Court held as under : — “ 138 . English and the analysis of Indian law clearly leads to an inescapable conclusion that not only the decision of a larger Bench is binding on a judgment of lesser ability but also an equal capacity . the bench of judges is binding .
in the instant case , the judgments mentioned in paras 124 and 125 are rendered by two or three Judges of this Court .
these judgments clearly disregard the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Sibbia &apos;s case ( 1980 ) 2 SCC 565 , which has exhaustively dealt with all aspects of anticipatory bail enumerated under Section 438 CrPC .
consequently , the decisions in paragraphs 124 and 125 of this judgment have been given with caution .
139 . in the event of there being no judgment in the nature of a constitutional bench or a larger Bench and if there is any doubt about the correctness of the judgments delivered by two or three Judges of the Court , then it would be appropriate to request the Hon &apos;ble Chief Justice to refer the matter to a larger Bench of appropriate capacity . &quot;
11- We disagree with the view expressed in paragraph 9 of the order in the case of Mst . Uma Devi and hold that the said conclusion would not be a binding example .
12- In view of the above fact , the Letters Patent Appeal is allowed and the order dated 10th May , 2004 passed by the learned Single Bench in CWJC number 338 of 2003 is set aside and writ application is dismissed .
the Central Administrative Tribunal vide order dated 6th January , 2011 passed in OA No.239 of 2010 allowed the application of Deepak Kumar Rai for appointment on compassionate grounds .
writ application was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court against the said order finding that the circular of railways is not like any law enacted by the legislature requiring a legality before relief is granted to the affected person .
the circular is merely a policy decision which has not affected this Court even on the previous occasion as there is no relationship with the purpose it is presented for the purpose of dealing with a son born to the first wife with the son of a deceased employee born out of the second wife .
14- A perusal of the same does not show that the earlier writ petitions have been referred to which have been dismissed .
however , on account of the view taken in LPA No. 163 of 2006 , we find that the order of the Division Bench is not warranted .
consequently , the review application filed by the railways is allowed and the order passed in the writ application is set aside .
Hon &apos;ble Aditya Kumar Trivedi , J. Hon &apos;ble Kusum Devi alias Suman Devi
Versus State of Bihar Criminal Appeal ( J ) no . 97 of 2015 . decided on 14th February , 2017 .
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act , 1985 — Sections 20 ( b ) ( i ) , 22C — Seizure of opium — Conviction and sentence — For conviction and punishment prescribed under NDPS Act , it is bound to comply with every procedure as prescribed under prosecution Act — Except as to relevance in the background of fact as alleged in recovery of articles with seizure list , among relevant to the seizure list of informants . does not , a sealed sample was received from the side of the FSL , but it does not sign that the sample was prepared from a packet or from both , there is absence as to the mode of drawing the sample in the prosecution that it was prepared at the place of occurrence or was prepared elsewhere — Police personnel communicated the superior to the police officials regarding the information regarding the recovery of prohibited articles from accused / appellant . there is not even a single word about procedure to say : the lapses on the part of prosecution at any point , with the production of prohibited materials in court , do much in regard to genuineness of prosecution case — Judgment of conviction and sentence set aside .
case laws . - ( 2013 ) 14 SCC 527 - Relied .
Aditya Kumar Trivedi , J. — Appellant Kusum Devi @ Suman Devi has been found guilty under judgment of conviction dated 07.01.2015 for the offence punishable under Sections 20 ( b ) ( ii ) ( C ) , 22C and the Sessions Trial No. 58 / 2011 arising out of Narkatiyganj Railway Police Station Case No.16 / 2011 ( NDPS Case No. 40 / 2011 ) , the 5th Additional Sessions Judge , the sentence dated 9.1.2015 passed by Champaran , Bettiah directing also to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay fine of Rs.1 lakh and in default to undergo further imprisonment for one year independently under both the grounds with further direction that the period of judicial custody spent in the course of trial be adjusted in terms of Section 482 Cr.P.C.
2- PW-1 Birendra Kumar Paswan recorded his own statement ( Ext . 2 ) on 19.04.2011 revealing the fact that on the same day at about 2.10 PM , in front of the external signal of Bhairuganj station , there was a rumour regarding the fall of an unknown lady from a train no . 12557 ( Saprevolution Express ) which was entered under entry number 596 at 19.4.2011 . and then he proceeded to the spot along with a lady concomitant - 464 , Hasnisa .
he reached the spot at 4 : 00 am .
after reaching the spot , he had directed the female concomitant to search the injured woman who was unconscious and in course of her , two packets of opium , each weighing half kg , were found tied with her waist .
a screen for Rs 220 / - was found , a philatelic in a bag with petechiae and blouse , an aircase in the territory , five photographs of the passport size , a number of mobile numbers for which the Seizure List was prepared .
thereafter , the victim was taken to hospital where the injury report was prepared by her .
3 . on account of recovery of the narcotic substance , a case no . 16 / 2011 was registered under various sections of the NDPS Act after which the investigation took place and after completion of the investigation , the plaint was filed whereafter the trial took place and ultimately came to the conclusion which is the subject matter of the present appeal .
4- As is apparent from the manner of cross-examination and also the statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. , the case of the defence is a total denial .
however , neither any defence witness has been examined nor any paper has been exhibited on behalf of the defence .
5- In order to prove its case , the prosecution had examined as many as six prosecution witnesses in all , out of which PW 1 Birendra Kumar is penwan , PW 2 ( inad Kumar ) is Binod , PW 3 Hugan , PW 4 Mohan Pandey , who is a witness of the seizure list , another witness of the list is PW-5 Brojesh Sah and PW 6 Nagesh Sah . Dwar Rai is a Railway Gatman .
the prosecution also exhibited before Special Judge ( District &amp; Sessions Judge ) vide Ex . 1 , Seizure list , Ext . 2 , written report , Ext . 3 , formal first information report , Exs.P.C.No. 4 , Ext . 5 , Investigating Officer and Ext . 6 , FSL report .
6- Having now come to the position of the witnesses , it is apparent that PWs 4 and 5 have not supported the factum of recovery upon which they were declared hostile .
PW-6 is a Railway Gitman who has not deposed on the fact of recovery and as such his evidence is found to be in vain at the point of recovery .
he only stated that after being aware of the incident , he had informed the Station Master for necessary action .
7- Now the matter is pending on the evidence of PWs 1 , 2 and 3 .
PW-3 Hhusan Nisha , a lady constable who had merely stated that on and at the time of the alleged day and time of the incident , he alongwith Sub-Inspector Birendra Kumar Paswan had taken the place of occurrence and on his instructions , he had searched the body of a lady who was unconscious and on being searched , took out two packets of opium , of which half kg was opium in each of which were tied from his waist .
besides , there were a frash , a finite , ticket , photographs , small piece of paper , petticoat , blouse , etc . which were seized by Birendra Kumar Paswan and a seizure list was prepared .
after that , the injured was shifted to the hospital .
during cross-examination , in paragraph 6 , he stated that the seizure list was prepared at the police station .
he also stated that in his presence at the police station , the seizure list was not prepared .
she is unable to say as to whether a copy of the seizure list was handed over to the concerned woman .
8- PW 1 , Birendra Kumar is the Paswan Information ant who had stated that on the alleged day and time of the incident , he had received a rumour regarding the occurrence of a woman having fallen down from a moving train on the day of occurrence which she had left towards the place of occurrence along with a lady constable after making entry in the station diary .
after reaching the place of occurrence , he had directed the female concomitant to be searched and in course thereof , two packets of opium with half a kilogram of opium were recovered in each packet which were tied to the waist of the lady .
the other articles were also recovered for which the seizure list was prepared .
thereafter , the injured lady was referred to hospital for treatment which was unconscious .
he also stated that the seizure list was prepared at the place of occurrence and also displayed the seizure list and the written report .
she identified the accused in the witness box .
in the course of cross examination in paragraph 4 he had stated that the packet was already sealed .
he had not opened it .
in para 5 , he had stated that the seizure list was prepared at the place of occurrence .
in para 6 , he had stated that when he reached the place of occurrence , the woman was lying unconscious in an injured condition .
in para 7 , he had stated that both the packets of opium were put into one bag .
a bag had come out of it , while another was inside it .
Jhola was red in colour .
there was a diary also .
9- PW-2 is the Investigating Officer .
he deposed that after the case was registered , the investigation was handed over to him .
accordingly , she had proceeded with the investigation and in course thereof , she had taken the statement of the informator and had given a detailed inspection of the place of occurrence .
the statements of other witnesses were also recorded .
the extra-judicial confessional statement of the accused / appellant was recorded .
he had sent the seized articles for chemical examination and for that , he had filed petition ( exhibited ) before the learned Sessions Judge .
he also stated that in the course of the confessional confessional statement which had indulged in the crime , the woman had disclosed that a male was also with her , but in the course of the investigation , that person could not be traced .
during cross-examination , it appears that the prosecution witness was not examined at any material point .
10 . there have been consistent judicial decisions that on account of the fixation of stringent punishment under the NDPS Act , the prosecution is obliged to comply with every procedure as prescribed under the Act .
apart from the inconsistency between the seizure list , relevant to the evidence of the written report ( Ext.2 ) and the evidence of PW 1 , the informator , in the background of the fact that the seizure list does not state in respect of recovery of the prohibited articles from the appellant , it is apparent that PW1 did not state where they were kept after preparation of the seizure list and after taking possession of the prohibited articles .
PW-1 is completely silent at this point , whether the seized prohibited articles were kept in the Malkhana or were handed over to PW-2 , Investigating Officer .
similarly , even with regard to the occurrence of the prohibited articles , PW2 is silent and even to the extent as to how she had received the same .
it is true that Ex . 6 , FSL report reveals that the seized articles are Charas , but from perusal thereof , it is apparent that the seized articles were transmitted to him on 15.07.2011 .
hence , the prosecution was under an obligation to make it clear that during the intervening period which means as to who possessed the articles during the period from 20.4.2011 to 15.07.2011 ? from a perusal of the report , it is apparent that a sample of 84 . 4 village load was obtained in FSL , but it does not identify that the aforesaid sample was taken from one package . or by both the packets .
further , the prosecution also lacks the sampling method , by taking it to the fact that it was prepared on the spot or was prepared elsewhere .
12- Further , after going through the evidence of material witnesses , i.e. , PWs 1 and 2 , it is apparent that they have not stated even a word with regard to communication to the higher police official having regard to the information relevant to the recovery of prohibited articles from the accused / appellant .
apart from that , there is not even a material exhibit in the course of the trial , nor there has come evidence from the prosecution that while holding the sample with it , it was destroyed in terms of Section 52A of the NDPS Act , the sample which was to be produced before the Court , nor any order of any kind has been brought out on the same point .
13- The aforesaid conditions are the order of law .
in terms of Section 55 of the NDPS Act , the officerin charge is to take possession of the prohibited articles and shall keep them in safe custody pending orders of the Magistrate regarding sampling / destruction thereof .
further under Section 57 of the Act , in addition to Section 42 ( 2 ) of the NDPS Act , the office bearers are bound to inform their higher office office concerned with regard to recovery of prohibited articles and arrest within next 48 hours .
14 . as discussed above , the lapses on the part of the prosecution at any point , with the non-production of the prohibited article in the Court , go to say much about the genuineness of the prosecution case .
( 2013 ) 1 SCC 527 , in Vijay Jain vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in 14SC 527 , it has been held : “ 9 . para 96 of the decision of this Court in the case of Noor Aga upon which learned counsel for the State very strongly relies , it is quoted hereinbelow : - ( SCC p 464 ) 96 , which is not the least important , not even physical evidence relating to the three samples taken from the volumes of heroin . he had gone .
even if it is accepted for the sake of the argument that the bulk quantity was destroyed , it was essential to produce the samples and prove the fact of the recovery of heroin as computed under Section 5A of the Act .
thus , in Para 96 of the decision in the case of Noor Aga , this Court has held that the prosecution has to produce samples in each case , even where the quantity has been allegedly destroyed .
in the aforesaid paragraphs of the judgment nothing is stated about the result of non production of prohibited articles before the court in prosecution under the NDPS Act .
10- On the other hand , on a reading of the decision of this Court in the case of Jitendra , we find that this Court has taken the view that in the trial for an offence under the NDPS Act , it was necessary for the prosecution to prove by cogent evidence that the alleged quantities of the prohibited articles had been seized from the accused and the best evidence to prove this fact is to produce the seized materials as clinically extracted from the material during trial and where the materials are alleged to be seized from the materials . the stings are not produced and the failure to produce the prohibited materials has not been explained by the prosecution , merely oral evidence that the materials seized from the accused would not be sufficient to make an offence under the NDPS Act , particularly when the Panch witnesses turned hostile .
again in Ashok , this Court found that the alleged narcotic powder seized from the accused was not produced before the trial Court as a material exhibit and there was no explanation about the non-production of the same and this Act ( or is .
to be excluded .
15- Having given a deep consideration to the facts and circumstances of the case along with non — compliance of the mandatory provisions of law , it seems unsafe to concur with the facts recorded by the learned trial Court .
such being the position , the judgment of conviction and sentence is set aside .
the appeal is allowed .
16- The appellant is in custody , if not required in any other case , he shall be released forthwith .
Hon ’ ble Hence CHANDRA GUPTA , Acting Chief Justice , Anjana Mishra and Sudhir Singh , JJ .
Laxmi Narain Singh ( in 889 ) Vishnu Prasad Singh ( in 8871 ) Versus Additional Member , Board of Revenue , Bihar , Patna and Ors . ( in both ) , ( C.JC Nos. 888888888771 of 1989 . decided on 17th January , 2017 .
( a ) Bihar Land Reforms ( Fixation of Ceiling Area and Land Acquisition ) Act , 1961 — Section 16 ( 3 ) — Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 — Section 4 — Preven-purchaser is a party to proceedings or not , if he is bound by decree or order against an ostensible owner , then it would necessarily bring to light that no liability can be imposed on an y or court to compel the actual owner to implead . in the question of a transaction being benami , which is to be conducted , it can be lawfully only in the presence of a ostensible owner — In spite of its non existence actual owner shall be bound by any finding in proceedings against an ostensible owner in spite of his presence — In proceedings the notice to the owner appearing in proceeding shall also be a notice to the actual owner in view of law — In presence of actual owner or in his non presence the decision would be binding on a question of benami against a question of benami as against the owner .
( b ) Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 — Limitation — Sections 3 and 4 — Benami transaction ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 shall have no application in respect of such benami transaction of prohibition designed under section 3 before it comes into force — Breach of sections 4 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) — Bar of pending claims / suit , appeals and other proceedings shall not apply in respect of pending — retrospective operation is not intended to be understood to be clear implication , unless a clear letter or clear meaning . it is not disclosed by it .
case laws . — AIR 1985 PC 5265 : PLJR 554 ; 1982 BCCJ 552 ; 1983 PLJR 16-Assed ; ( 1996 ) 7 SCC 55 ; AIR 1951 SC 128 ; AIR 1965 SC 171 ; ( 1886 ) 31 CD 402 ; ( 1995 ) 2 SCC 630 ; ( 1989 ) 2 SCC 95 — Relied Sudhir Singh , J. — twin juvenile Singh — State of Bihar — 85 . a : in the case of 1985 PLJR 554 , whether or not a reexamination of the view expressed by a Full Bench of this Court in the light of the provisions of the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 is a core issue framed by a Division Bench of this Court requiring it to be referred to the Full Bench .
2- These two writ petitions are on facts and are closely related in the matter of dispute , thus both the writ petitions are laid before the Full Bench under reference for parodox hearing .
3- Since the petitioners have raised the plea of benami ownership in respect of the transferred land , the Division Bench of this Court , taking into consideration the prohibitions designed under the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 , has referred the matter for adjudication of the issue indicated above .
4- Briefly , we are in this case of twin Kishore Singh ( supra ) regarding the scope of adjudication of &apos; benami &apos; , under the proceedings of Section 16 ( 3 ) of the Bihar Land Reforms ( Fixation and Land Acquisition ) Act , 1961 ( hereinafter referred to as &apos; the Act &apos; ) and the requirement of the actual owner of the property being impleaded besides the owner of the property in any proceeding under Section 16 ( 3 ) of the Act . the views expressed by the Bench will be taken into account .
in the case of Double Kishore Singh ( supra ) , Justice S.S. Sanwalia , Chief Justice ( who was then in that position ) framed the following three issues : —
( 1 ) Whether the issue of benami ownership in proceedings for carry forward purchase under Section 16 ( 3 ) of Bihar Land Reforms ( Transfer of Ceiling Area and Land Acquisition ) Act , 1961 can be raised and investigated ?
( 2 ) Whether the case of Narendra Kumar Ghosh @ Fly Ghosh and another vs. Shiv Nihilana Ram and others ( AIR 1972 PC , p . 1 ) , has been correctly decided while answering the aforesaid question .
( 3 ) Whether it is necessary for the Court or for the proxy to impleaded and bring on record the actual owner of the property sought to be purchased in spite of the presence of the ostensible owner in a proceeding under Section 16 ( 3 ) of the aforesaid Act .
5- The facts of the case of the twin Kishore are required to be noted in brief .
by a registered deed , the petitioner number 2 Devendra Mahto have purchased Plot No. 415 situated in the village from 5 to 7 , Chainpur .
the deed was executed on 17th March , 1979 .
the petitioners had made out a case of benami transactions .
the petitioner no . 1 Jay Singh was the actual buyer , whereas the apparent purchaser petitioner no . 2 was his domestic servant .
one Ganesh Mahto initially filed a case of pre - emptive purchase in respect of the transferred land impleading petitioner no . 2 , but later in proceedings for forepurchase , he had pleaded that the couple Kishore Singh is the actual purchaser .
it was an admitted position that the petitioner no.1 was not formally party in the proceedings . in the case of Jay Kishore Singh ( supra ) , Justice S.S. Sanwalia , Chief Justice ( who was then in this post ) had answered the issue on his behalf and while passing judgment on behalf of Justice S. K. Choudhary : therefore , on principle , it is necessary to be decided on the language of the statute and on the previous example that the Act is required to be decided accordingly . a well - founded vision of a benami transaction is not excluded for the purposes of sec . 16 .
in the case of Narinder Kumar Ghosh ( supra ) no meaningful challenge can be reached .
as will be evident from the above reasons , independent and added , I agree with this view .
we may now refer to incidental but normally important questions 3 , namely , whether it is obligatory for the Court or the actual owner to impleaded , despite the presence of the ostensible owner on record in a proceeding under Section 16 ( 3 ) of the Act .
the Board of Revenue has , for cogent reasons , come to the conclusion that the burden of interference and becoming a party to the proceeding is itself upon the real owner and it is neither the Court nor the arbitrator &apos; s act to compel him to appear .
if the real owner chooses to keep away , he must necessarily face the consequences and only must blame himself because the order or decree against the ostensible owner would be binding on him fully , on the principle as well as on the precedent established .
it would normally apply to the investigation and inference in respect of the issue of benami ownership , and perhaps it cannot be urged that absence of actual owner as a party to the proceedings would lead to some kind of infirmity in the same .
the point appears to be so well settled on principle that it is unnecessary to labour at this point .
as already back as per the authority in Gurar Narayan vs. Shiv Lal Singh ( AIR 1918 Pran Cecil 140 ) it was observed as follows : the aforesaid view has been accepted and reiterated by the final court and it was expressly referred to by Justice Untwalia in the case of Narendra Kumar Ghosh ( supra ) .
now once the principle is clearly established whether the actual purchaser is or is not a party to the proceedings , he is bound by an order or decree against the ostensible owner , it must necessarily appear that no liability can be imposed on the furtherance or on the court to compel the actual owner to implead .
hence , the question of benami transaction of benami can be lawfully carried out in the presence of only an ostensible owner .
it is not to say that the court or the proceeded would not have the discretion or the discretion to implead the real owner , but only to hold that the actual owner , in spite of his absence , would be bound by any finding in the proceedings against the ostensible owner .
it is equally to be kept in mind that the notice to the ostensible owner in the proceeding would be a notice to the actual owner in the eyes of law and , therefore , the decision made against the ostensible owner in the presence or in his non existence on the question of benami ownership would invariably be binding on him .
a similar view has been taken by a Division Bench of this Court in S.K.Hallauddin and others vs. Nabi Hassan &amp; Ors . ( 1982 B.C.J552 : 1983 PLJR 16 ) wherein , speaking on behalf of the Bench , Justice S.K. Chowdhary has observed as follows : “ I entirely agree with the view taken in the case of Narendra Kumar Ghosh .
since it is now well settled that the question of benami can be admitted by the revenue authority in the absence of actual owner and the decision will be binding on the latter , it cannot be argued that the decision of the DRR at this point is without jurisdiction . &quot;
11- While finally concluding , answer question No.1 is answered in Yes and it is held that benami ownership issue can be raised in a proceeding under Section 16 ( 3 ) of the Act and the same can be investigated .
question 2- The case of Narinder Kumar Ghosh at this point has been correctly decided and its ratio is hereby affirmed .
question No.3 is answered not and it is held that it is neither for the Court nor the ownerof the property sought to be purchased in the presence of the ostensible owner . it is obligatory on the part of the Court or for the proxy and the order against the apparent owner and the decree shall equally be binding on the actual owner . &quot;
7- In the case of the twin Kishore , Justice P.S.Mishra ( who was then a party to the post ) and also the said Full Bench , while speaking on behalf of him , held as under : — 8 — For the right to prohibit benami transactions and to recover the property held benami and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto , Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 was enacted .
9- We notice that the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 was retrospectively made enforceable from the date of 19th May , 1988 , except for Sections 3 , 5 and 8 which came into force on 5th September , 1988 .
10- Under Section 3 of the Act , benami transactions have been prohibited , but such an prohibition is prospective operation .
( 1996 ) In the case of S. Shankra Hali and Shankar Institute of Philosophy &amp; Culture vs. Kishori Lal Gospel , reported in 7500 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court had held that no transaction concluded between the ostensible owner and the actual owner before the Act came into force would be by no provision of any kind .
11- Under section 4 of the Act , there is another prohibition related to the right to recover the property which is benami held .
this contemplates that no suit , claim or action shall be entertained against the ostensible owner of the property or against any other person for the enforcement of any right by or on behalf of the actual owner in respect of the said property .
Section 4 ( 2 ) of the Act also imposes the rider that he , who claims to be the actual owner of the said property , would not be permitted to take any defence against the ostensible owner in any suit , claim or action to the effect that the property is benami .
12- From the facts of the present case , it is quite apparent that on the basis of the registered deed dated 08.10.1987 , respondent no . 5 had sold the land to the petitioners , and in respect of the transferred land , respondent no . 4 had filed the case of pre purchase before DCR , Dalinarai , Smastipur on 5.1988 .
therefore , the important question that arises for our consideration is whether the prohibition designed under Sections 3 and 4 of the Act , 1988 will apply in the present case by retrospective operation .
13 . section 3 ( 13 ) of the General Clauses Act , 1897 states that &apos; commencement &apos; used in the context of an Act means the day on which the Act comes into force .
14- In Kesavwan vs. State of Bombay , AIR 1951 SC 128 , the Hon ’ ble Supreme Court had held : &quot; . it is a fundamental principle of implementation that every statute is prima facie prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication with retrospective operation . &quot;
15- Another principle which flows out of presumption against retrospectivity is that nobody is required to destroy the rights conferred by the statute by those occurrences which occurred prior to its passing .
16- The Supreme Court in the case of S.S. Gadgil vs. Lal &amp; Co . , AIR 1965 SC 171 had followed the view expressed in the case of Road vs. Reid ( 1886 ) 31 CD 402 that &quot; retrospective operation is not intended to be regarded as a logical corollary of the general rule unless that intention is disclosed by express words or necessary implication , there is a subordinate rule to this effect that the statute in it is that the statute in question — the section is not to be implemented as being in greater retrospective operation than required by its language . &quot;
17- In the case of R.Rajgopal Reddy vs. Papini Chandrasekaran reported in ( 1995 ) 2 SCC 630 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court was asked to explain the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 .
a Bench of three Judges of the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of Mithilesh Kumari vs. Prem Behari Khare ( 1989 ) 2 SCC 95 and came to the conclusion that the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 was prospective and not retrospective .
para 21 read with para 21 of the said judgment thus : &quot; 21 . with respect to a consequence of the aforesaid discussion , it has necessarily to be decided that the Division Bench erred in taking a view that Section 4 ( 1 ) of the Act can be made effective in respect of the suit filed before the Section comes into force .
similarly , the view that in all the suits filed by the persons whose names the properties are held cannot be supported by any such defence that the properties are held benami at any future stage of the proceedings under Section 4 ( 2 ) .
as discussed earlier , even in the cases of pending suits , even after coming into force of Section 4 ( 2 ) , the vested effect of Section 4 ( 2 ) would be limited to Section 4 ( 2 ) if such defence has not already been allowed .
hence , it is necessary to be respectfully held that the judgments of this Court in Mithilesh Kumari do not state the correct law insofar as the application of Sections 4 ( 1 ) and 4 ( 2 ) to the extent pointed out hereinabove in the pending proceedings are concerned , when this Sections had come into force .
accordingly , the question is not answered for consideration .
the Registry shall now keep all these matters before a suitable Bench to dispose of the same on merits in the light of the answer given by us . &quot;
18- Now , we are of the opinion that the Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 is prospective and not retrospective .
Benami Transactions Prohibition of prohibition computed under Section 3 of the Act
it is not in dispute that in the present writ petitions , since the land was transferred to the writ petitioners under the two registered Sale Deeds dated 08.10.1987 under the sale transaction , and our considered couple are of opinion that before the commencement of the Land Acquisition ( Respondent 4 ) Benami Transactions ( Prohibition ) Act , 1988 , before the issuance of DCC R Leisarai , Samastipur , we are of the considered couple . we have no reasonable opportunity to re-examine the view expressed by the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Singh ( supra ) .
accordingly , the issue referred to us by the Division Bench of this Court is answered .
19 . now , we would like to consider the merits of the present case .
the facts giving rise to these writ petitions are largely identical .
except the petitioners , the situation is identical as that of the respondents in both the writ petitions .
respondent no . 5 Umesh Kant Choudhary , by way of registered sale deed dated 08.10.1987 transferred a piece of land comprising of RS plot no . 6068 belonging to Khata bearing RS plot no . 6068 and 4 Dhuar area in favour of Lakshmi Narain Singh ( petitioner of CWJC number 8889 of 1989 ) and said Umesh Kant Choudhary by means of a contract sale deed dated the same day , namely , 08.10.1987 . belonging to 404 , a piece of land belonging to the same R.S. Fopa number 668 bearing 3 Kathas , 4 Dhumar area was also transferred in favour of Vishnu Prasad Singh ( CWJC number 8871 of 1989 ) , who is the son of Laxmi Narain Singh .
the above mentioned pieces are located at Chanderore village , ugipur , Smastipur .
the respondent No. 4 , namely , Abdul Gani had filed a Land Reforms Case No. 24 / 87 - 88 before the Deputy Collector , Dalasarai , Samastipur claiming right to purchase land transferred in favour of the petitioners under Section 16 ( 3 ) of the Bihar Land Reforms ( Land Acquisition ) Act , 1961 and Land Ceiling Case No. 24 / 87 - 88 and 2587-88 / 88 before the Bihar Land Reforms Act , 1961 .
the respondent No. 4 claimed to be a ryot of the area adjacent to the transferred land .
the respondent No.4 had argued that the land transferred is his land adjacent to the north , east and west side of the land .
the case of the petitioners before the Court below is to the effect that one Ram Jan Chowdhary ( respondent no . 6 ) was the actual purchaser of the transferred land and a ryot of the transferred land was also near to him .
the learned court below did not consider the case of the petitioners on the ground that the plea of benami transactions cannot be considered under the proceeding for impressing .
the Deputy Collector of Land Reforms , DalSingharai also rejected the case for pre-emption , mentioned under the order dated 29.07.1988 , on the ground that the respondent No. 4 had failed to prove his case of a ryot near the transferred land .
the respondent No. 4 filed a tenancy appeal before the Additional Collector , Smastipur assailing the common order dated 29.07.1988 passed by LRDC , Dalseisarai .
the petitioners also filed a cross appeal against the said order .
the learned Additional Collector , Smastipur took note of the fact that the afier had never denied the same that the actual purchaser respondent no . 4 had filed two revision cases before the Board of Revenue , Bihar and both the revision cases registered an order dated 20 / 01 / 1989 passed by the Additional Collector , Samastipur , affirming the order of the LRDC Dalai to the extent indicated above . the reference was made .
considering the facts and the documents available on record , the learned Member , Board of Revenue , was of the view that Survey Plot No. 670 is adjoining to the west of the transferred land and in the revision survey , the name of Plot No. 670 respondent No. 4 is recorded .
hence , the respondent No. 4 has to prove his claim of being near the proximate to the transferred land to West of the transferred land , the Survey Plot No. 6070 is a land .
accordingly , the learned Member , Board of Revenue had set aside the impugned order passed by D.C.R. Dalsinai as well as the Additional Collector , Smastipur and allowed both the revision applications filed by respondent No. 4 vide order dated 09.06.1989 .
20- Being aggrieved by the combined order dated 9.6.1989 passed by the Member , Board of Revenue , Bihar , Patna in Revision Case No. 46 / 1989 and 47 / 1989 , the petitioner , that is , Laxmi Narain Singh , had filed CWJC No. 8889 of 1989 before this Court and the petitioner , namely , Vishnu Dev Prasad Singh , VJTC No. 88871 of 1989 .
the petitioners have contested the claim of pre purchase of respondent No.4 on the two grounds as mentioned in para No.9 of the writ petition which are read as follows : - ( i ) the afier had not established that Schedule .
his share in the plot of land mentioned in the said plot is adjoining to the disputed plot .
( ii ) Ramjan Choudhary , for the petitioners , was a benamidar of the respondent no . 6 , who was in the southern boundary of the plot sold . &quot;
21- One of the main arguments of the petitioners is that respondent No.6 Ramjan Choudhary is the real owner of the transferred land , whereas , these petitioners are only the ostensible owner and further the argument is that the respondent No.6 is the nearest ryot holding the vacant land on the ground in question .
but we are unable to understand as to why the actual owner respondent No.6 did not contest himself against the claim of pre — emption of respondent No. 4 before the statutory forum and why the impugned order passed by the Member , Board of Revenue , Bihar has not been assailed by the order whereby the right of pre — purchase of the respondent No. 4 on the land in question has been affirmed .
it also comes to our notice that in the present proceeding , despite valid notice to respondent No.6 , he did not record his presence even then .
22- We are of the opinion that the petitioners members have not been able to traumatize the specific finding of the Board of Revenue that the proponent holding the RS plot number 6070 adjacent to the west of the transferred land has a right of pre — purchase because of this .
23- We , therefore , do not find any valid reason to interfere with the impugned orders .
24 . accordingly , both the writ petitions are dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble Virendra Kumar , J. Hon &apos;ble Shobha Kumari and another vs. State of Bihar and others J.J. C. No. 493 of 2015 . decided on 14th February , 2017 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 3043 / 2017 / 34 — Constitution of India Article 226 and 227 — Dowry death petition for CBI investigation — Prarthana is on the ground that the present investigating agency has miserably failed to discharge the liability of a fair and professional investigation agency — factual details of the present case reveal that petitioners are not satisfied with the result of investigation but they have tried to prove successful to obtain the required result of investigation — there is no averment , nor there is any material that the petitioners presented any evidence pursuant to the notice — The petitioners did not care in proper investigation of the case by producing the witnesses themselves or otherwise by taking appropriate steps — If there was evidence in a case diary , Magistrate could alter the conclusion of investigation by police by considering report under Section 173 of Cr.P.C. by pointing out last writ applications of petitioners — High Court pointed out different — it had already been kept in mind and issues were issued for just and proper investigation of the case — It is not a fit case where extraordinary power should be exercised — Criminal writ application dismissed .
case laws.7 ( 2010 ) 3 SCC 571 — Relied . lawyers . 62 . Birendra Kumar , J. — Article 227 of the Constitution of India , with a reference to the issue of a writ in mandamus , directing the respondent authorities to handover the investigation of Police Station Case No. 54 of 2010 lodged on 16.03.2010 under Sections 3043 / 201 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code on 16.03.2010 against the husband and other relatives of the husband of the victim girl , who was the daughter of the petitioners . this is an application .
accused persons are not parties to this writ petition .
2- It is urged on the ground that the present investigating agency / State Police has been wholly careless , arbitrary , unconscionable , in the matter of investigation of the aforesaid case .
in fact , the agency has miserably failed to discharge the liability of a fair and professional investigating agency .
3- The petitioner Shobha Kumari is the informant of the aforesaid Police Station Jakkanpur , P.S. Case No. 54 of 2010 and another petitioner is husband of Suresh Kumar Shobha Kumari .
according to the first information report , six years before the police case was registered , the marriage of Karuna Kumari alias Pinki was married to accused Pramod Kumar @ Goddadu .
after the marriage , the in-laws had started torturing Preti Kumari because of not meeting her demand on the dowry at the most .
on many occasions the remedy for detente was prohibitive .
the victim , after she had left her matrimonial home some years back , was living in the house of her parents .
however , the husband had prepared the victim to accompany him to her matrimonial home and immediately thereafter the victim was informed of disappearance by the accused Pramod Kumar .
under these circumstances , the informant had suspected that his daughter has been murdered for dowry .
after the investigation , the police filed the charge sheet only on 06.07.2012 against the husband of the victim , under Section 364 IPC .
4- In further investigation , the police reconsidered its opinion on the basis of the receipt of a letter allegedly pointed out by the victim lady in writing that she had committed suicide due to any misconduct or perhaps she had acted as a venture of courage .
now the police has arrived at the conclusion that this is a case of misunderstand the fact and the victim may appear in the future .
5- Before the police report was submitted under Section 173 Cr.P.C. , the petitioner Shobha Kumari had filed C.W.J.C.number 360 of 2010 in this Court for giving a direction for fair and quick execution of Jakkanpur Police Station Case No.54 of 2010 .
this Court , by order dated 22.04.2010 , disposed of the criminal writ petition under Appendix 6 and passed the following orders : — The petitioner has filed this writ application for giving a direction to the respondents to conduct an impartial and quick investigation of Jakkanpur Police Station Case No. 54 / 2010 instituted on 16.03.2010 .
learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the respondents are not proceeding for investigation in the matter in a fair and proper manner because despite the statements of the witnesses , the accused persons are not arrested .
learned counsel submits that the Chief accused of the case , namely , the husband of the deceased was arrested but within 60 hours , he was released .
the matter has been instituted on 16.03.2010 and it would be ante-timed to say that the police are not taking any action in a fair and proper manner .
in this view of the matter , this Court is not inclined to interfere in the matter .
learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner has filed an application in this regard before the Deputy Inspector General of Police , Patna .
if the application of the petitioner as contained in Appendix 2 has been received in the office of Deputy Inspector General of Police , Patna Board , Patna , is required to look into the matter and take necessary steps in accordance with law .
the writ application is disposed of with the aforesaid observations and directions .
6 . at the same time , accused Pramod Kumar @ Gaddu , husband of the victim girl of this case had filed complaint case no . 1334 ( C ) of 2010 in the Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate , Patna which was registered as Banda Colony Police Station Case no . 93 of 2010 .
this complaint was with the allegation against the informator and others of this case that they have killed the victim while she was in the house of her parents .
7- Thereafter , the present petitioners and two other co- accused of Bran Colony Police Station Case No. 93 of 2010 had filed C.W.JC Number 703 of 2010 indicating the grievance that the Police Station Jakhanpur is not properly investigating into the case number 54 years 2010 and Banda Colony Police Station Case No. 93 of 2010 .
following findings were disposed of by way of Annexure-9 to the aforesaid writ application on 27.01.2011 :
in the said circumstances , I am not inclined to interfere in the matter .
it needs to be stated , however , that both the aforesaid cases , namely , Jakhanpur Police Station Case No. 54 / 10 and Banda Colony Police Station Case No. 93 / 10 be investigated expeditiously without unnecessary delay .
more so far as the grievance of the petitioners in regard to the investigation is concerned , if any , it would be open to them to bring it to the notice of the Superintendent of Police concerned through the representation on which according to law would be considered . &quot;
8- Thereafter , revealing the analogous grievance before this Court , the petitioner had filed C.D.G.C. number 1053 of 2012 .
on the basis of supplementing investigation in the aforesaid case , the respondents brought to the notice of this Court vide second supplementary counter affidavit dated 04.07.2013 in CWJC No.1053 of 2012 that the girl was missing and a supplementary statement was filed on 12.05.2014 that the matter is an error of fact as the victim committed suicide under the evidence in the case diary under para 60 of the case .
the aforesaid criminal writ petition was disposed of on 18.7.2014 vide Annexure-17 to the following observations : &quot; the learned counsel for the petitioners , after some cross-examination , insist on recall this petition in the light of the report of the supplementary counter affidavit dated 15.05.2014 filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 for following the remedy in accordance with law .
accordingly , the matter is dismissed as withdrawn case . &quot;
9- Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that firstly , only in recording these findings of abduction by the husband for the purpose of marriage and later merely the conclusion of the victim &apos;s bare disappearance and in the final conclusion that the victim committed suicide for any other reason , the conduct of the police shows that the police did not properly investigate the matter .
their argument is that there is no bar in either the filing of the charge sheet or directing the progress of the trial to investigate into the CBI or other competent agency or even the ordering of re-investigation of the case by the same agency .
the contention of the petitioner is that it is a fit case which requires re-investigation by the CBI .
10- Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand submits that since the police have already filed the plaint and it is on the basis of an additional evidence during the investigation , the petitioners have only adopted delaying tactics to harass the system .
the petitioners could have filed affidavits of the witnesses before the higher authorities if the Investigating Officer was deliberately not recording their statements , which has not been done in the present case .
no witness has appeared before the learned Magistrate or before any other authority to prove the suspicion of the petitioners that this is a case of dowry death .
even more so , in each case by the CBI would not be required to place burden upon the CBI and to direct investigation which is already overburdened .
the aforesaid fact would disclose from this counter affidavit filed by the CBI that several other important matters for investigation have already been assigned to the CBI .
11- In State of West Bengal and Ors. vs. Committee for Protection of People &apos;s Rights , West Bengal and Ors . , ( 2010 ) 3 SCC 571 , the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the scope of power of judicial review under Articles 32 and 226 enshrined in constitutional courts .
the matter was for consideration before the Constitution Bench for directing the CBI to investigate the said case .
the Supreme Court observed that the power of judicial review can be used to protect fundamental rights and cannot be commuted by invoking the doctrine of separation of power .
the Court can issue such a direction if not only the accused , but also the victim and the witnesses so make a substantive justice required to protect the fundamental right .
paras 68 and 70 of the judgment are reproduced below : “ 68 . thus , by examining the rival arguments in the context of the constitutional scheme , we give the following conclusions .
( 1 ) The fundamental rights enumerated in Part II of the Constitution are inherent and cannot be extinguished by any constitutional or statutory provision .
any law that abrogates or complies with such rights would be violative of the principle of basic structure .
the real effect and effect of the law on the rights guaranteed under Part III is to be taken into account in holding that it destroys the basic structure or not .
V ) Article 21 of the Constitution in its broad perspective seeks to preserve the lives and individual freedoms of persons except in accordance with the procedure established by law .
the said Article in its broad application takes within its ambit not only the rights of an accused but also the rights of the victim .
the State is obliged to enforce the human rights of a citizen including its own office bearers , providing for an appropriate and impartial investigation against any person accused of the commission of a cognizable offence .
in certain circumstances , a witness to an offence may also seek protection by the State and shall be provided to him .
( III ) In view of the constitutional scheme and the jurisdiction conferred on this Court under Article 32 and to the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution , the power of judicial review being an integral part of the basic framework of the Constitution , no Act of Parliament can exclude or repeal the powers of the constitutional courts .
in fact , such powers are indispensable for providing a viable content to the objectives of the Constitution embodied in Part III and other parts of the Constitution .
more than that , a federal Constitution also involves limitation on legislative powers in the distribution of legislative powers with Parliament and the State Legislatures , and therefore , requires an authority other than Parliament to ascertain whether such limitations are transgressed-
judicial review acts as a final arbiter not only to give effect to the division of legislative powers between Parliament and State legislatures , it is also necessary to show any violation by each unit .
therefore , taking the words of Lord Steve , ‘ judicial review ’ justified by combining the principles of ‘ separation of powers ’ , the rule of law , the principle of constitutionality and the access to judicial lists ’ .
( IV ) If a legislative act violates the federal structure , the Constitution provides for the protection of the federal structure by ensuring that the Courts act as guardians and interpreters of the Constitution and provide remedy under articles 32 and 226 where the contravention is attempted .
in these circumstances , any direction given by the Supreme Court or the High Court in exercise of power under Article 32 or 226 to uphold the Constitution and the rule of law cannot be said to be a direction violating the federal structure .
( V ) A ban of Parliament by the Constitution and a ban on the executive by Parliament under any enactment does not amount to a ban on the power of the Judiciary under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution .
( vi ) List of the Seventh Schedule on one side , if any ,
entry II and List II on the other hand
in terms of Entry 2-A and Entry 80 , the investigation is permissible by another agency , subject to the consent being granted by the concerned State , there is no reason why in an exceptional situation , the Court will be precluded from exercising the same power which the Union can use in terms of the provisions of the statute .
in our opinion , the use of such power by the constitutional courts would not violate the doctrine of separation of powers .
indeed , if in any such circumstance the Court fails to grant the relief , it would defeat in its constitutional liability . &quot;
( VII ) When the Special Police Act itself provides that subject to the consent by the State , the CBI can start investigation in respect of the offence which was otherwise within the jurisdiction of the State Police , the Court also can exercise its constitutional power of judicial review and direct the CBI to start the investigation within the jurisdiction of the State .
the power of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot be taken away or commuted by Section 6 of the Special Police Act .
irrespective of the existence of any statutory provision acting as a restriction on the powers of the courts , the restriction imposed by Section 6 of the Special Police Act on the powers of the Union cannot be read as restriction on the powers of the constitutional courts .
the exercise of the power of judicial review by the High Court , therefore , in our opinion , would not amount to infringement of either of the doctrine of separation of power or of the principle of federal structure .
70- Before parting with the case , we deem it necessary to emphasise that despite wide powers conferred by Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution , while passing any order , the Courts must necessarily bear in mind certain self-imposed limitations on the exercise of these constitutional powers .
the very plenitude of the powers under the said articles requires great caution in its exercise .
so far as the question of issuing a direction to the CBI to conduct the investigation in a case is concerned , though no non-flexible direction can be laid down to decide whether such power should be exercised or not , but time and again it has been insisted that no such order is to be passed as a matter of common case or merely because a party has levelled some allegations against the local police .
this extraordinary power is to be exercised sparingly , cautiously and in exceptional circumstances where it becomes necessary to provide credibility and instil confidence in investigations or where the incident may have national and international dimensions or where such an order may be necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental rights .
otherwise a flood of cases would come to the CBI and with limited resources , it may be difficult for it to properly investigate even serious cases and in the process lose its object with its credibility and unnecessary investigations . &quot;
12- The factual details of the case in hand would disclose that the petitioners are not satisfied with the result of the investigation ; rather , they have made a successful attempt to obtain the requisite result of the investigation .
the FIR was registered on 16.09.2010 .
immediately thereafter on 03.04.2010 , a Writ Petition ( Annexure 5 ) was filed wherein upon completion of the investigation , cognizance was urged in the matter of payment of final form by the police .
the list of the prosecution witnesses was also mentioned in the protest petition .
before the filing of the complaint petition , the petitioner was served with a notice under Appendix 4 on 27.03.2010 from the Investigating Officer to produce the evidence as aforesaid in Jakkanpur Police Station Case No. 54 of 2010 .
the special attention of the petitioners was drawn to the fact that no evidence has been placed before the Investigating Officer by the petitioners till the date of notice .
there is neither any averment nor any material to prove that the petitioner led any evidence pursuant to the aforesaid notice .
therefore , having taken appropriate steps by producing the witnesses or otherwise , the petitioners themselves were not interested in the proper investigation of the case .
had there been evidence in the case diary , the learned Magistrate while dealing with the report under Section 173 CrPC could keep the difference from the conclusion of investigation made by the police .
the past writ applications of the petitioners before this Court and the directions as mentioned above indicate that different benches of this Court have already properly taken care of and issued directions for just and proper investigation of the case .
13- For the aforesaid reason , in my opinion , this is not a fit case where this extraordinary power should be exercised .
hence , there is no merit in this criminal writ application .
the same is accordingly dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble Ashwani Kumar Singh , J. Vishwanath Chaudhary @ Vishwanath Prasad Choudhary &amp; Ors . Versus State of Bihar &amp; Anr . Versus Salik . no . 30357 of 2013 . decided on 6th April , 2017 .
Negotiable Instruments Act , 1881 — Section 138 — Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Section 420 — Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 — Section 482 — Dunionication and cheating — Previous complaint was filed on 13th day of issue of notice to accused persons — No cognizance could be taken against the petitioners under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act and there is no allegation that petitioners never intended to scrap the complainant , but complainant has accepted his complaint only . for long , there was a friendly relationship and the amount was paid to the petitioners to purchase a vehicle on the promise that he would return the amount in due time — Complainant accepts withdrawal of Rs . 1,30,000 / - from accused persons in different installments , but the balance amount was not paid and the cheques issued by one of the accused on account of insufficiency of money were dishonoured — Such allegations made in the complaint petition were given to IPC . it would not take place within the ambit and scope of an offence , as it would be a case of breach of a contract — That mere breach of contract cannot bring about criminal cheating unless , at the beginning of transaction , intention is shown to be fraudulent or fraudulent — It is an intention which is a essence of offence — Once upon admission by complainant himself that some part of sum taken as a loan had been returned in several instalments , it cannot be concluded by any eye — the very beginning was a fraudulent intention — Impugned orders and criminal case quashed .
case laws.7 ( 2000 ) 2 SCC 745 ; ( 2014 ) 10 SCC 77777777777Relied ; motr N or appeallis attached ; mozr . despite having been called repeatedly , none is present on behalf of the petitioners .
heard learned counsel for the State as well as learned counsel for the opposite party No. 2 , learned counsel for the birds present and perused the record .
3- This application has been filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure ( for short &apos; Cr.P.C. &apos; ) for cancelling the order dated 14.3.2012 passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate , Vaishali in the complaint case number 33-338 of 2012 by which , under Section 420 of Indian Penal Code ( for short &apos; IPC &apos; ) and the Negotiable Instruments Act , 1881 ( &apos; for short &apos; the Indian Penal Code &apos; ) . a prima facie case has been made out under Section 138 , petitioners have been summoned to face trial .
4- The aforesaid complaint case was filed by the opposition no.2 Ashok Kumar Jha , alleging therein that he knew the accused persons much earlier .
in 2007 , he had taken a loan of Rs . 3 , 80 , 000 / - for purchase of a Bolero vehicle .
he returned Rs . 1 , 30 , 000 / - in various installments and promised to return the balance within a month .
after repeated requests , petitioner no . 3 Geeta Choudhury handed over a cheque of Rs . 2,50,000 / - to him on 25.12.2011 , which was deposited by him in his bank account on 29.12.2011 but the bank had informed on 6.1.2012 that due to inadequacy of money cheque could not be treated .
a legal notice was sent to the accused persons on 24.01.2012 , but he failed to pay the amount .
5- On the basis of the aforesaid allegation , a complaint was filed under Section 200 CrPC in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate , Vaishali , Hajipur .
the complainant was examined on truthful affirmation and two witnesses , namely , hostile money and Vijay Vikram , were examined under Section 202 Cr.P.C. , after which the petitioner was summoned to face trial for offences punishable under Section 420 IPC and Section 138 of NI Act .
6- On perusal of the record and also hearing the learned counsel for the opposite party no.2 , it appears that a notice was sent on 24.01.2012 with regard to dishonour of the cheque and the complaint in question was filed on 06.02.2012 which would mean that the complaint had been filed only after 12 days of the notice was sent by the complainant to the accused persons .
from a perusal of the complaint , it would also appear that a vague statement has been made that notice was sent to the accused persons .
7- In order to appreciate the constitutionality of the impugned order , it would be relevant to refer to Section 138 of the NI Act which reads as follows : on account of insufficient balance of credit in 138 , where any cheque is issued by a person to any of his accounts held in a bank or partly or fully discharged from his debts or other liability and the account having been insufficient of the amount in the cheque account either before or before . shall be deemed to have been returned unpaid by the bank on account of agreement to make payment to any other persons , and to have caused the offence , and shall , without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act , be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years , or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque , or with both ; provided that nothing in this section shall apply ; ( a ) that he is not presented to the Bank within a period of six months from the date of issue of the cheque or within the period of its validity , whichever is earlier , ( b ) the holder of the cheque receiving the amount under the cheque or , in the ordinary course , the holder of the cheque does not give notice of the intention to pay the amount due to the drawer of the cheque , as the case may be , within thirty days from the date of its return of the bank . within fifteen days of receipt of the notice , the person receiving the amount under the cheque or who is holding the cheque in its normal course fails to pay the same .
explanation . — For the purposes of this section , “ loan or liability ” means a legally enforceable debt or liability .
8- The Supreme Court in Kusum Invols and Alez Limited vs. Pennar Patterson Sewa Limited &amp; Ors . &#91; ( 2000 ) 2 SCC 745 &#93; held that for making a case under Section 138 of I.IAct , the following ingredients were required to be fulfilled , ( i ) any loan account held by a person in a bank for payment of certain amount of money to another . a cheque is required to be drawn into discharge of other liability ;
( ii ) that the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it was written or presented within the period of its validity , whichever is earlier ;
( iii ) that the cheque is returned unpaid by the bank , either by reason of the fact that the amount standing to the credit of the account is insufficient to dishonour the cheque or by an agreement with the bank exceeds the amount to be paid from that account ;
( iv ) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque calls for payment of the said sum of money by giving a notice in writing to the holder of the cheque within 15 days of receiving the notice by him ;
( V ) the drawer or the holder of such cheque fails to pay the said amount of a cheque in due course within 15 days of receipt of the said notice .
&#91; 9 &#93; . &#91; 9 &#93; The point that cognizance of an offence punishable under Section 138 of the I Act can be taken on the basis of any complaint filed before expiry of the period of 15 days in the notice required to be summoned in the terms of Section 138 ( c ) of the I Act , Yogendra Pratap Singh v. Savitri Pandey and another &#91; ( 2014 ) 10 SCC 713 &#93; the Supreme Court consisting of three Judges . examined by him .
10 . after the discussion of the issue on the point , the Bench held thus : “ ... any commission of an offence is sine qua non for filing a complaint and taking cognizance of such offence .
a bare reading of the provision of clause ( c ) of the proviso makes it clear that no complaint for any offence under Section 138 of the I Act can be filed unless a period of 15 days has passed .
there is no complaint in view of the complaint in the case of the petitioner before the within 15 days from the date on which the notice has been served to the Speakeraccused .
it is not a question of premature complaint when it is filed before 15 days from the date on which the notice has been served , it is not a complaint under law .
in fact , Section 142 of the NIAct , on a written complaint , apart from so doing , creates a legal bar on the court to take cognizance of an offence under Section 138 .
since , from the date on which the notice to the complainant / accused has been served , there is no complaint at all in view of the law filed under Section 138 , Act , prior to 15 days before the date on which the notice to the complainant / accused is served , naturally no cognizance can be taken of any offence on the basis of such complaint ..........
11 . in the instant case , it is the admitted case of the complainant that the complaint was filed on the 13th day of the issuance of notice to the accused persons .
thus , in view of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in clauses ( c ) and ( supra ) of Section 138 of the I Act , no cognizance could be taken against the petitioners under Section 138 of I Act .
12- The ratio under which cognizance of the offence has been taken under the other single Section is Section 420 IPC .
Section 420 IPC prescribes punishment for the offence of cheating as defined under Section 415 IPC .
13- Section 415 IPC reads as follows : “ 4 . cheating . — Whoever , fraudulently or dishonestly inducing a person by deceit , by deceit being so denied to any person , to deliver any property to any person , or to consent that a person must maintain any property , or intentionally induces any person to whom he is so deprived , such act , or omits to do what he would not have been denied all manner whatsoever , nor does he omit to do , and the act or omission which would cause , or is likely to cause , physical , mental , reputation or property harm or harm to the person , is said to be “ cheating ” .
14- The essential ingredients of Section 415 IPC are : — ( 1 ) deception ( 2 ) of a person , fraudulent or fraudulently or intended to deliver any property or to keep any person in his possession ; or ( b ) omission to do something which he would not have done if he had not been so extinguished
( 3 ) The act or omission may cause the complainant to be physically , mentally , any damage or loss to his dignity or property .
15- Thus , unless the said factors are attracted on the basis of a complaint made , a person cannot be prosecuted for the offence of cheating .
from a reading of the complaint itself , it would appear that there is no allegation that the petitioner ever intended to sift the complainant , rather the complainant has admitted in the complaint itself that he had a friendship for long time and he had paid the amount to the petitioners for purchase of a Bolero vehicle on the promise that in due time he would return the amount .
complainant admits to get back of Rs.1,30,000 / - from accused persons in different instalments , but remaining amount was not paid and the cheques issued by one of the accused Geeta Choudhary were dishonoured on account of inadequacy of money .
16- In the opinion of this Court , such allegations made in the complaint would not bring the matter within the ambit and scope of Section 420 IPC as it would be a case of violation of contract .
a mere breach of a contract cannot bring about criminal cheating unless , at the beginning of the transaction , a fraudulent or fraudulent intention is shown .
therefore , it is the intention which is the essence of the crime .
once admitted by the complainant himself that some part of the amount taken as loan was returned in several instalments , in no view , it can be concluded that the petitioners had a fraudulent intention since the beginning .
17- In view of the discussions made above , in my considered opinion , the learned Magistrate had committed serious error in taking cognizance of the offences against the petitioners and summoning him to face the trial under Section 420 and 138 of IPC .
accordingly , the impugned order dated 14.03.2012 passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate , Vaishali , Hajipur in the complaint case number 1-338 years 2012 is quashed .
consequently , the complaint case number C-1 - 338 years 2012 are also dismissed .
18- The application is allowed .
Hon &apos;ble Mengeshwar Sahu , J. Dy . Budhiya Devi vs. confiscation Kunwar No. 437 of 1977 . decided on 7th March , 2017 .
title suit No. 07 of 1974 against the judgment and decree dated 12.3.1977 passed by the six Additional District Judge , Ara ( Bhojpur ) in 1974 .
Indian Succession Act , 1925 — Section 278 — Grant of a letter of administration — Dying of title suit based on will — Petitioner ’ s husband was playing a pivotal role in obtaining a Will in respect of property of testator to his wife — legatee had not signed in presence of author , nor will was read over and explained to testator — Will is not proved according to law , attested — a will under suit is not a pure will , and the appeal is dismissed .
advocate , Mar . - Mehr . R . R . J . p . , J . p . App ; N . , F . or R . Muneshwar Sahu , J. . — The plaintiff has filed this first appeal under the judgment and decree dated 12 . 3 . 1977 passed by the 6th Additional District Judge , Arrah ( Bhojpur ) in 1974 , by which the learned Additional District Judge has dismissed the suit .
2- The plaintiff-appellant had filed an application under Section 278 of the Indian Succession Act for grant of a letter of administration in connection with the Will dated 31.3.1970 executed by Mst . Lal Choudhary .
3- The appellant had claimed an administration letter alleging that Ram Dei Kanwar was taken over by the appellant and Ram Dei Kunwar had a great affection and affection towards him .
the appellant is the step-daughter of Rak Kunwar , who was the daughter-in-law of Ram Dei Kunwar .
she executed a Will in a healthy physical and mental condition .
after knowing the details of the Will , she put her left thumb impression in the presence of the witnesses , hence , the appellant is entitled to letters of administration in respect of the properties mentioned in Annexure A of the Application under Section 278 of the Indian Succession Act .
4- The memorienty-respondent , Seizure Kunwar , had filed the properties alleging that the Will is a forged and manufactured document prepared by the husband of Budhiya Kundwar , that is , Rajnath Choudhary .
the contents of the Will were not read over and she was not in a fit physical and mental condition , nor in the presence of the witnesses , she laboured a left hand thumb mark on the will .
5- The complainant had also alleged that it was two step daughters of Ram Dei Kunwar , with mutineers and Mst .
both of them got half share in the property of their father Ramlal Choudhary , after the death of Mst Ram Dei Kunwar .
accordingly , they had taken the partition of the property and each got the possession to the extent of half share .
subsequently , the complainant sold some property by executing the sale deed in favour of Moti Lal Singh and Bhagwan Singh .
the appellant Budhi Devi has also purchased some lands from the habitual defaulter .
under Section 144 Cr.P.C. there was a proceeding between Rajnath Choudhary and his wife Budhiya Devi and the shopkeepers from this occupant .
6- The learned lower court on the basis of the pleadings had recorded the case of the administration letter as a title suit and thereafter proceeded to decide the correctness and otherwise of the Will in question .
ultimately , after the evaluation of the evidences , the learned lower court had found that the Will in question is not a pure document and , accordingly , dismissed the Waqt .
7- Mr. Ashutosh Ranjan Pandey , learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Court below had wrongly dismissed the administration letter by misappreciating the evidence .
the appellant examined the author as well as one of the witnesses of attestation .
the plaintiff-appellant was also specifically stated that the legatee had also put marks of his left hand thumb knowing the contents of the Will and the plaintiff had also examined an expert in support of his case .
the expert had submitted a report that the left hand thumb mark on the will is of the testator , but the court below rejected the evidence on ridiculous grounds .
8- Learned counsel also submitted that the husband of the appellant was also examined .
evidence has been led to show that legatee was being looked after by the plaintiff-appellant and she was in a fit physical and mental condition but the learned Court below did not rely upon the evidence of the plaintiff and rejected the application under Section 278 of the Indian Succession Act .
9- As stated above , none had appeared on behalf of the respondent .
10- The only point required to be decided in this appeal in view of the submission of learned counsel for the appellant is whether the Will has been properly attested or not or is a genuine document or not .
11- PW-6 is the author of the Will .
the will is scribed as Ext.9 .
PW-11 is one of the attesting witnesses .
the other attesting witness Ram Kishun Singh has identified the legatee before all the Registrar at the time of the term of the Will .
12- PW6 , who is stated to have been told by the author , has stated in his cross-examination that the attestation witnesses Ram Kashoon Singh and Radha Kishna Sah did not attested the Will in his presence .
the certificate , marked as Ext . 6 , is in his handwriting , was prepared at the instance of Rajnath Choudhary , husband of Budhiya Devi .
this PW-6 has clearly stated that at the time of registration , he was not present in Jagdishpur .
it has also stated that the draft of the will was given to him in the village by Rajnath Choudhary and he prepared the Will on the basis of the draft handed over to him by Rajnath Choudhary .
now we deal with the evidence of the attesting witness PW-11 .
13- PW-11 is Radha Kishun Sah .
he has been examined on commission .
in his examination in chief , he had stated that the Will was not read out to Mst Ram Dei Kunwar .
he appended his signatures on a paper at the instance of Rajnath Singh and Mst.Ram Dei did not put the thumb impression of his left hand in his presence .
except for these two witnesses who are of great importance , no other attesting witness has been examined in support of the attestation .
it is mentioned here that after obtaining leave from the Court , PW-11 was still not cross-examined by the plaintiff-appellant as he had refuted the case of the plaintiff-appellant in his examination-in-chief .
now , therefore , merely because a Will is registered , no reliance can be placed on it , especially when a Will ( Exh.9 ) has not been proved as per Section 63 ( 3 ) of the Indian Evidence Act .
on the contrary , the attesting witness has clearly stated that he had signed a paper and Ram Dei Kunwar never got the thumb impression of his left hand in his presence .
the author has also refuted the case of the plaintiff-appellant .
the evidence of these two witnesses had clearly established the fact that the husband of the plaintiff was playing a major role in obtaining the name of his wife in relation to the property of Ram Dei Kunwar .
at his instance the author prepared a will in the village .
the testator did not sign in the presence of the author , nor the will was read over and revealed to the testator .
14 . the other circumstance is that Mst Jaffarti Kunwar has sold some properties , documents have been produced by the representationist and the respondent , who have been recorded as Ext . A series .
it also appears that proceedings were initiated under section 145 of the Cr.P.C. between those who bought from Rajnath Choudhary and the Tapti Kunwar .
Ex.C is an application filed by Rajnath Singh and compromise application Ext.D in which Rajnath Choudhary admitted the title and possession of the purchaser .
15- Apart from the aforesaid documents , the defendant-respondent has produced both registered Sale Deeds on the Kaur of Exhibits A / 7 and A / 8 , in support of the fact that the plaintiff-appellant has purchased some land from the guest house .
now , therefore , the plaintiff-appellant was also admitted the right , title , interest and possession of the confiscation of the land .
the sale deed is of 1973 .
the will has been registered in the year 1970 .
the question is that if the Will was in favour of the plaintiff-appellant then she was the rightful owner of the property as it was executed by Ram Dei Kunwar .
there is no explanation as to why he had purchased the property from the occupant .
16- In view of the above facts and evidence , it is clear that a Will has been prepared by Rajnath Choudhary , the husband of the appellant herein .
this Will is not proved in accordance with law , nor is it attested in accordance with law .
the evidence of P.Ws.1 / 7 , A / 8 read with A / 8 clearly establishes that the document was not executed at the request of Ram Dei Kunwar , nor the document was read over and explained to Ram Dei Kunwar .
therefore , if there is also a sign of the thumb of his left hand , it will not make any difference .
in other words , it cannot be described as a true will in any case on the basis of the only thumb impression of the left hand .
17- In view of my above discussion , I find that the Will in question is not a pure will .
hence , the findings of the trial court are affirmed at this point .
18- In the result , this first appeal is dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble Rajendra Kumar Mishra , J. Santosh Kumar Singh @ Bippattu Singh and another Vs . State of Bihar and others , 1999 ( 2 ) SCC 26131 of 2012 . decided on 13th April , 2017 . 3 . a complaint petition has been filed by the opposition no . 2 after the petitioner no . 1 has filed title suit against his wife and others , but there is no description in the complaint petition as to the filing of the title suit - Thus , the complaint case appears to be a counter case for the filing of title suit by the accused-petitioners against opposition no . 3 , his wife and two others — Criminal proceedings are quashed .
heard learned counsel for the petitioners , learned APP for the State and learned counsel for the opposition no . 3 .
2- This application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is directed against the order dated 13.05.2011 passed in the complaint case no . 3101 ( C ) of 2010 whereby the learned Judicial Magistrate , first Class , Patna , had summoned the accused petitioners on inquiry under Sections 504 , 385 , 385 , 323 , 341 , 448 , 506 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code .
3- The facts , which confronting the application , are that the complainant – the opposition no . 2 , being a Labour sensor , was present in the premises of Chanakya Pita Palace Complex with the workers on 9.10.2010 .
some of the non - social elements were demanding the flaws of Chanakya cinema for pulling down Chanakya cinema and building a multistoried building .
9 . in the evening of 10.10.2010 , petitioners had come on a motorcycle alongwith 40 to 50 persons and surrounded the complainant-opposite party No. 2 and stopped the work threatening the dire consequences .
at that time , Bittu Singh @ Santosh Singh ( petitioner no . 1 ) had caused injuries to the complainant-opposite party no . 2 by means of a pistol , whereas Dipu Singh ( petitioner no . 2 ) had also caused injuries to the complainant no.2 through fist and tawls .
Om Narayan Sharma ( opponent no . 3 ) , the owner had come there , then the petitioners had demanded a ransom of Rs . 10,00,000 , threatening that unless the ransom is paid , the work would not be permitted to be worked .
thereafter , Om Narain Sharma ( opposition no.3 ) went to the Gandhi Maidan to the Police Station to lodge the case , but the incharge office bearer was not present , when a written complaint was made to the police station .
on 10.10.2010 , the opposition no.2 had again gone to the police station , then he came to know that no case has been registered on the basis of his written report .
thereafter , he informed the higher police officials and lodged the complaint case .
after the complaint case no . 3101 ( C ) of 2010 was filed by the complainant-opposite party no . 2 , the learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class , Patna , through the impugned order , summoned the accused-appellant on a prima facie case being inquiry under Sections 504 , 385 , 385 , 323 , 448 , 506 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code , by virtue of the impugned order .
4- Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that in fact , by late Shamsher Rahman , the petitioners were kept as tenants at Fatimah Gul , Chanakya Prett Palace Kampooch , livelihood road , Patna in the year 1987 and the rent was being paid by him .
after his death , a rent was being paid to his son Mohd . Syed Zarut Rehman , who , through his letter dated 19.7.2001 , informed the petitioners about the division of the property along with request for payment of rent to Smt . Yolithias Bano .
subsequently , by January , 2010 , rent was being paid to the Yolithias Bano , but then he had refused to take the rent by collusion with Om Narain Sharma ( opponent no . 3 ) and his wife Sakita Sharma and started harassing the petitioners to vacate the rental premises .
thereafter , the petitioners filed the suit bearing no . 33 of 2010 on 21.07.2010 against Yeolian Bano , Md . Syed Zamindar Rahman , Om Narain Sharma ( opposite no . 3 ) and his wife Sakita Sharma for injunction to interfere with the possession of the petitioner on the premises .
in the above title , the order as the case may be was passed on 21.1.2011 on the application of the petitioner-petitioners .
in order to avoid interference in the possession of the premises of the petitioner , after the filing of the title suit number 33 of 2010 by the petitioner against opposition no . 3 , the opposition no . 3 only has been able to force the petitioner to make an unfair pressure so that the petitioners could not contest the suit , through opposition no . 2 , to lodge the present complaint case .
5- Learned counsel for the opposition no . 3 submits that his son Shri Jivan Narayan Sharma after purchase of the premises covered by the rent portion of the petitioners had filed a title suit bearing no . 66 of 2011 against the accused-petitioners and the suit was decreed ex-parte on 22.11.2011 , but he has not denied the filing of the title suit no . 33 of 2010 by the accused-petitioners , in which the opposition no . 3 and his wife and 3 are the defendant . as a party was made , and there is no denial to the passing of the order , as the case may be , on 21.01.2011 .
6- On going through the complaint case no . 3101 ( C ) year 2010 , it appears that after the petitioner no . 1 filed a title suit no . 33 of 2010 against the opposition no . 3 , his wife and others , a complaint petition has been filed by the opposite party no . 2 on 18.11.2010 , but the opposition no . 3 , his wife , who was the defendant no . 3 and 4 , collating the suit number to interfere in the premises of the accused-petitioners . the filing of 33 years 2010 did not set out in the complaint petition .
thus , the complaint case appears to be a counter blast to the filing of the title suit no . 33 of 2010 by the petitioner-petitioners against the opposition no . 3 , his wife and two others .
7- In the result , the impugned order dated 13.05.2011 passed in the complaint case no . 3101 ( C ) year 2010 and the entire criminal proceedings are hereby quashed and this application is accordingly allowed .
Hon &apos;ble Abasauddin Ainullah , J. vs. State of Bihar &amp; Ors . , reported in CWJC No. 5061 of 2017 . decided on 10th April , 2017 .
Municipal Law — Municipal elections — Dismissing petitioners in electoral rolls are that of Panchayat No.68 only by ward No. 62 is resident but despite not being resident of that area , they have been wrongly shown as voters of ward No.62 and since there is no new limitation then they need to be made as voters for Ward No. 68 — Last judgment for communicating petitioner to State Election Commission — liberty was granted to file representation before the DO , Patna City .
advocate : - Mr . B . K . m . , Financial Services , M / s Amiat Arrest &amp; Seguv N , MCAOC , MYOgedd , SWORN , AGAIN , ASSOR , sixty - one , the Vice - Chancellor or the Deputy Commissioner of Punjab , was pleased to hear the learned counsel for the petitioner State and the State Election Commission .
2- The petitioner is a bona fide voter of W.No.68 of the Patna Municipal Corporation .
her grievance is that about 1100 persons , who were the voters of Ward No. 68 in the previous election , but presently , where no delimitation has been made and they are still residents of Ward No. 68 , have been included in the last Electoral Roll pertaining to ward No.62 .
3- Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the voters of serial numbers 17311 to 18569 of Ward No. 68 are resident of Ward No. 68 , but they have been wrongly shown as voters of Ward No. 62 , notwithstanding that they are not resident of that area and since no fresh delimitation has taken place , they were required to be made as voters of Ward No. 68 , learned counsel for the State Election Commission submitted that he should not be retained as voters . no wrongful intention can be attributed to the sarne , who has done this , but there is always a possibility of some error in that act , because it is wide enough .
thus , he submitted that if in fact there was any error , it would be rectified for which the matter would be remitted to the competent authority .
5- In view of the same , the writ petition is disposed of conveying the liberty to the petitioner to file a representation before respondent No.7 by April 13 , 2017 , with a copy of this order , specifying the grievance as set out in the present writ application .
he may also explain his grievance orally but that is to be done on the basis of the facts stated in the representation .
such grievance shall be hurriedly reviewed by respondent no.7 and a final decision shall be taken by him within four working days of the completion of hearing by respondent No.7 , and the same shall be communicated to the State Election Commission immediately so that it may deal with such recommendation with the electorate in question as per statutory requirements .
Hon &apos;ble Ajay Kumar Tripathi and Neeloo Agarwal , JJ . Kamal Nain Prasad Singh Vs . State Electricity Board of Bihar and others LP.A. Nos. 11174 of 2014 Cri . JC . 663 of 2008 . decided on 19th April , 2017 .
service Law — Recovery — Appellant was a third class employee when excess payment was made which he had received on account of defective assessment of pay scale , sought to make recovery after retirement — This is not permissible — Impugned orders set aside .
( paras 3 and 4 ) Case laws . - ( 2012 ) 8 SCC 417 ; ( 2015 ) 4 SCC 334 — Relied .
Ajay Kumar Tripathi , J. — When the appellant had filed a writ application for the retirement of his deducted gratuity at Rs . 41 . 358 . 37 / - and also for payment of leave salary , etc . including payment of salary for the period of 01.04.1997 to 31.01.1998 , the learned Single Judge , reported in ( 2012 ) 8 SCC 417 , Hon &apos;ble Chandi Prasad Nihal and others vs. State of Uttarakhand and others . relying on the decision of the Supreme Court , the writ application was dismissed on 11.04.2014 .
2- However , there has been progress in law and thereafter ( 2015 ) 4 SCC 334 has been further decided by the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab vs. Rabfiq Jesus , reported in ( 2015 ) 4 SCC 334 , where the case of Chandi Prasad Unionyl ( supra ) has also been explained .
3 . the admitted position is that the appellant was an employee of a third class when there was a sought to recover after retirement for the so — called hypersensitive payment which he had received due to defective fixation of his pay scale .
in Rafiq Jesus Christ ( supra ) the Hon ’ ble Supreme Court has very clearly laid down that it is not permissible .
4- The law is in the other position rendered , the Division Bench is obliged to set aside the order dated 11.04.2014 , to allow the Letters Patent Appeal and order the respondent to remit the amounts deducted and other legal dues to the respondent , within a period of six weeks and without any delay .
5- The Letters Patent Appeal is allowed .
Hon &apos;ble Virendra Kumar , J. Krishna Bihari Prasad Sinha ( in 136 ) Nikhil Priyo and Anr . ( in 312 ) Versus State of Bihar through Director General of Police , Bihar , Patna &amp; Ors . ( in both ) Cri.Naz.Nos.136 , 312 of 2017 . decided on 30th May , 2017 .
protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act , 2012 - Section 3 — Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 - Section 3 ( 1 ) ( s ) ( s ) , Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 354 / 354A ( ii ) / 506 / 34 — Constitution of India — Article 226 — Constitution of India — Alcoils and blackmail — Indignity of caste by taking name and abusing some of the offences — ( xxxiii ) Allegedly some other offences become prima facie against others — FIR need not be a encyclopedia of all relevant facts — What offences have been disclosed against petitioner , it has to be seen at the stage of charge — Occurrence and credibility of this allegation is subject matter of investigation and trial — Court is not inclined to interfere with prima facie allegation in FIR only on the basis of disputed documents — It is not clear in the present case that the occurrence has taken place . whether had taken place or not , as claimed by the petitioners or had taken place just outside the gate as claimed by the informant-in-I- The principle that when two views are possible , that view is to be given precedence , which takes the side of the accused , is applicable at the stage of trial and not in the stage of quashing of FIR — Present , FIR brings out a cognizable offence even under the provisions of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Prevention of Atrocities Act against accused persons . - There is no case to quash the FIR yet FIR prima facie constitutes / reveals offences against the petitioners — It cannot be argued that allegations are absurd and inherently improbable — writ application dismissed .
case laws . - ( 2008 ) 8 SCC 435 ; 1992 Supp ( 1 ) SCC 335 — Referred ; 1988 ( 1 ) SCC 692 ; AIR 2001 SC 3253 — Relied ; AIR 2011 SC 1090 - DB . p . K . s . &amp; press-release-detail.htm ? 36 y Kairr , one each of the learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned counsels appearing on behalf of the respondents .
2- The above nominated writ petitioners under Sections 354 / 354A / 354A ( i ) ( i ) / 506 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code , under Section 3 ( 1 ) ( r ) ( s ) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 , and the Patna SC / ST Police Station Case No. 26 of 2016 registered for the offences under Section 3 of the POCSO Act , 2012 . the petitioner Krishan Prasad Sinha , CRI . J . C . number 312 of 2017 , is the father of Nikhil Priyadarshini and Manish Priyadarshini .
4- The petitioners have relied upon the writ jurisdiction of this Court to cancel the entire FIR of the Patna SC / ST Case No. 26 of 2016 and in the alternative urged the Department of Crime of the State Government to handover the investigation .
the second plea for handing over the investigation to the Crime Investigation Department now in view of the statement of the petitioners in the second supplementary affidavit , has become useless in view of the statement of the petitioners that the investigation has already been handed over to the Crime Research Division of the Police .
5 . Surabhi Prasad , the FIR in question was registered by respondent no.7 alleging therein that after the conversation on mobile phone at the beginning , she had become familiar with petitioner Nikhil Priyadarshini .
since the informant-in-law relates to a respectable and elite family and the petitioner had disclosed that she belongs to a very respectable family , friendship had been established between the two .
as the informant was a minor and he had no experience , he had come to enjoy the playground and had become close to each other .
Nikhil Priyadarshini took her home on some occasions when she met the members of the complaint of Nikhil Priyadarshini .
taking advantage of friendship , Nikhil Priyadarshini started trying to establish a physical relationship with her and sent a sexual ring on the mobile phone of the informants .
one of the friends of the Priyadarshini , co - accused Sanjeet Kumar Sharma was also involved in the whole affair .
when his father , Krishna Bihari Prasad Sinha , and his brother Manish Priyadarshod , had gone to the house of the petitioners on the conduct of the informative philosophy , they had repelled him in the following words : &apos; Sauli Naujat Harijan has come to complain to me .
my son is the one who has done the right thing ; the more will be fearlessness . ”
6- On 22.12.2016 the aforesaid fardbayan was recorded on 22.12.2016 and on 24.12.2016 a statement of the giving of notice under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by the learned Magistrate was recorded by the learned Magistrate , in which he had supported the FIR and also it was alleged that the petitioner Nikhil Priyadarshini established friendship with the informant-petitioner and both started coming there .
thereafter , Nikhil Priyadarshoscope established physical relationship with her and made video recordings of physical relations and started blackmailing by video and later physical connections .
his friend Samjeet Kumar Sharma and brother Manish Priyadarshitra were also championing the cause of beauty .
they were haunted by saying that they were low - caste and Harijan .
when the informant had obstructed Nikhil Priyadarshna , the allegation is that Nikhil had beaten her after consuming the village .
thereafter , she went to the aforesaid act with the father of Nikhil Priyadarshini , she also abused her by name of caste and caused blows .
there is also a allegation against Nikhil that he still sends a sexually stained message to the informant .
7 . after the statement of the mother under Section 164 Cr.P.C. , on the insistence of the prosecution , on 12.01.2017 , in the FIR , offences under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code , Section 3 ( 1 ) ( w ) , 3 ( 2 ) ( va ) ( w ) , and to protect children from sexual offences , Section 4 of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 2012 , 10 of 2012 , the offences under 12 , 17 were added .
8- Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that bare perusal of FIR and statement of the victim girl under Section 164 Cr.P.C. would disclose that the case is of love affair between two adults and the instant false case has been registered only to pressurise the entire family members to put pressure on their relationship , whichever is the reason .
learned counsel would submit that the victim girl was initially a student of the Nam Dame School , Patna , and her date of birth is recorded as 17.01.1996 in the capillary certificate under Appendix 2 .
while failed in the notice - making examination , she was sitting at the entrance examination of another school in Muzaffarpur , in which her date of birth is recorded as 7.3.1998 through Appendix 3 .
the medical report on Appendix 5 , as per report dated 2.12017 , indicates his age to be 19 to 20 years , thus , he was adult on the day of occurrence .
hence , no offence is made out under the provisions of POCSO Act .
9- Learned counsel pointed out the attention of this Court to the photographs and mobile messages between the informant and the Nikhil Priyadarshini , to indicate that love between the two was not one - sided ; rather it included the spontaneity of the notice .
that apart , a perusal of the FIR under the provisions of SC / ST Act does not make out against the petitioners , namely , Manish Priyadarshod and Krishan Behari Prasad Sinha because there is no allegation that the alleged act was committed at a place falling in the public domain .
it is also argued on behalf of the petitioners that during the investigation by the CBI , the authorities have found that the alleged day of the incident was not a minor .
in State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal , Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court has clearly laid down that where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable that on the basis of them no intelligent person can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused , the FIR is required to be quashed .
he further submits that the petitioner Krishan Prasad Sinha is a retired bureaucrat having services history , hence , a prudent person will not be admitted to commit the alleged offence , particularly in the factual background of the case .
he further submits that the house of the petitioners is a big house surrounded by boundary wall , therefore , it was certainly not in public view and if two views are possible , the view to be taken in favour of the accused .
10- The respondents no.7 have filed a counter affidavit disputing the claim of the petitioners and quashing the same along with others on the ground that the FIR of disputed questions of fact cannot be looked into to quash the FIR .
it is not necessary that the FIR should contain one word and the entire information .
therefore , there is no merit in the argument of the petitioners that there has been some improvement in the allegations in the statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. compared to what was stated in the FIR .
it is further submitted that respondent no.7 was only once passed in the entrance examination and it is only from Parmount School , Muzaffarpur , wherein her correct date of birth as 7.30 / 1998 is recorded and any other documents produced in the writ application are manufactured and false documents .
( 2008 ) 8 SCC 435 reliance has been placed on the case of State and another through Swaran Singh and another vs. Standing Counsel .
for the submission that the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court has held that any place which appears to the public is a public place within the meaning of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act .
lastly , it is argued that since the investigation is continuing by the CBI and the prima facie case appears in the FIR , this Court should not interfere on the basis of the external materials brought on record by the petitioners in exercise of power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India .
11- Before considering the rival logic of the parties , it would be appropriate to observe the law in the sphere of consideration for quashing the FIR .
in 1992 State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal reported in 1992 Supp ( 1 ) SCC 335 , the Supreme Court recorded the following cases as an illustration in the background of interpretation of the principles of law established by the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court in a series of judgments in regard to various relevant provisions of the CrPC under Chapter XIV and the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the exercise of inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. such power can be used to prevent abuse of the process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice .
the Supreme Court made it clear that it would not be possible to allege a precise , clearly defined and sufficiently substantially the source - bound and unflexible guidelines or rigid formula and to provide a free list of a variety of cases in which such a power should be used .
para 102 of the judgment contained in the instances is reproduced below : * 102 .
( 1 ) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint , even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused .
( 2 ) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials , if any , accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence justifying an investigation by police officials under Section 156 ( 1 ) of the Code except an order of a Magistrate within the ambit of Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code .
( 3 ) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused .
( 4 ) Where , the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence .
rather , only constitute a non-cognizable offence , an investigation is admissible without any order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code .
( 5 ) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of the same that no intelligent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused .
( 6 ) Where there is a clear constitutional bar in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act ( under which a criminal proceeding is instituted ) in relation to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and / or where a specific provision providing for effective redress of the grievance of the aggrieved party is contained in the Code or the concerned Act .
( 7 ) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and / or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with a higher motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to personal and personal grudge . &quot;
reported in 1988 ( 1 ) SCC 692 in Madhavrao Jioji Scindia vs. Sambhajirao Chandojirao Angre , reported in para 7 of the judgment the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court observed thus : —
7 . the legal position is well settled that when a prosecution is asked to be quashed at the initial stage , the test is to be adopted by the Court by taking it that the uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie prove the offence .
or not .
the court has also to take into consideration any special features which may exist in any particular case to consider whether it is expedient to permit a prosecution to continue and are in the interest of justice or not .
this is so on the ground that the Court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where , in the opinion of the Court , chances of conviction eventually become bleak and , therefore , no useful purpose is being served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue , the Court may quash the proceeding taking into consideration the special facts of that case even though it may be at a preliminary stage .
in the decision reported in S.M. Dutta vs. State of Gujarat , reported in AIR 2001 SC 3253 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court held thus : 9- We respectfully record our concurrence to him .
criminal proceedings are not to be hampered in a normal course of events unless it amounts to abuse of process of law .
thus , in the ordinary course , the cancellation of a complaint is an exception and a boredom than the general rule .
the correctness of the averments in the FIR cannot possibly be looked into and the document has to be read as a complete document so as to ascertain the intention of the author .
it is not a document requiring a decision with precision nor a document which requires mathematical correctness and reasonableness .
rather it should be able to point out or communicate an offence in a large way and in the event of completion of the said test , the question relating to quashing of a complaint would not arise .
it is , however , in the same context that one feature at this stage is to be kept in mind that there cannot possibly be any guiding factor as to what investigation is to be hampered and the investigations which are not to be so frustrated in the earlier phase .
the first information report needs to be considered and if a perusal of the same replies , which leads largely to disclosure of an offence , the Courts of law are precluded from assuming the jurisdiction of the police , as the two organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and do not enter into one of the areas of the other .
learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the case of Harendra Kumar Di vs. Rebasaldlata Koi and others reported in AIR 2011 SC 1090 , which decision runs to para 21 .
21 . what is read as follows : — 21 . in our judgment , the said observations cannot be read to read out that in a criminal case where the trial remains to be held and the case is at a stage of issuing or taking cognizance , the materials relied upon by the accused , which are in the nature of a public document or the materials which are beyond doubt or doubt or doubt , are in any circumstances of their Section 482 Cr.P.C. by the High Court . no circumstance can be seen in the exercise of jurisdiction or the exercise of revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the Code .
it is well settled now that while exercising inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code or revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the Code , it is not appropriate for the High Court to consider the defence of the accused or proceed further on the course of inquiry with regard to merits of the allegations while seeking quashing of the complaint .
however , in an appropriate case if in view of the documents produced by the accused which are beyond doubt or doubt , the allegation against him cannot be sustained , it would be a travesty of justice if the accused is sent back for trial and is asked to prove his defence before the trial court .
in such a case , for encouraging justice or to prevent abuse of injustice or process , the High Court may observe the materials which may have an important bearing on the case at a prima facie stage . &quot;
aforesaid case of Harshendra Kumar DD is not helpful in the facts and circumstances of the present case as two public documents i.e. school certificates exist and one of them has been challenged by giving notice of correctness of one of them and investigation is already going on at this point .
12- It is , no doubt , established by various judicial pronouncements that the powers of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India are very wide and the very plenitude of the powers requires great caution in its exercise .
the Court must be cautious to see that its decision in the exercise of power is based on sound principles .
this Court should normally avoid the decision in a prima facie case where all the facts are incomplete and hazy , more so when the evidence has not been compiled and presented before the Court and the issues involved , whether factual or statutory , are of such amplitude that they cannot be seen in their right perspective without sufficient material .
13- In view of the aforesaid principles , this Court examines the fact and statutory qualities of this case .
a perusal of the FIR would disclose that the ingredients of some offences are made against some of the petitioners and some other offences are prima facie made against others .
the FIR need not be an encyclopedia of all the relevant facts .
a conjoint reading of the statement of the informant under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. recorded within two days of the FIR and the first information report , really discloses the offences against the petitioners .
what offences are to be committed against the petitioner , thus this Court is not opening its mind at the stage of the charge so that the trial Judge may not be biased .
the truthfulness and credit of the allegation is the subject matter of investigation and trial .
14- The main force of the petitioner is that since the declaration was an adult girl , which is proved by her school certificate existing at Annexure 2 , which is a public document , this Court should quash the criminal prosecution of the petitioner Nikhil Priyadarshini for offences under the provisions of POCSO Act for material justice in the case .
the respondent no.7 has denied the correctness of Annexure-2 and other documents in paragraph 10 of the counter affidavit .
in these circumstances , this document ( Annexure 2 ) is not an uncontroverted document , though a public document .
the investigating agency is investigating the matter ( as per the supplementary counter affidavit of the petitioners ) .
hence , this Court is not inclined to interfere with the prima facie allegation in the FIR only on the basis of a disputed document .
however , the petitioners will be at liberty to raise the aforesaid point at the appropriate stage of trial .
15 . the second point for consideration is whether the offences alleged under the provisions of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act are prima facie disclosed on the basis of the materials in the first information report or not .
for better assessment , the offences referred to are reproduced hereunder : “ 3 ( 1 ) No person , who is not a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe ;
( r ) defames or intimidate any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe , at any place falling in the public view with intent to insult ;
( s ) abusive language any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in the name of a caste at any place occurring in public notice ;
( aa ) ( i ) any woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe , shall intentionally touch that she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe , while such act of touching is of sexual nature and is without the consent of the recipient ;
( I ) any woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe , shall use the words , acts or interventions of sexual nature , knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe ;
( 2 ) No person , who is not a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe , shall commit an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or more under the Code of Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860 ) , against any person or property , knowing that such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such member , shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and with fine ;
( VA ) any offence specified in the Schedule shall be committed against any person or property , knowing that such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or that property belongs to such member , he shall be punishable with the punishment as specified under the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860 ) for such offences and shall also be liable to fine ; 16 . in the case of Swaran Singh ( supra ) , the fact was that there was an allegation of impolition carrying the caste near the house-
in these circumstances , the Hon ’ ble Supreme Court had held that the said place was within public vision .
in the instant case it is not clear whether the incident had taken place inside the house or not , as claimed by the petitioners , was immediately out of the gate as claimed by the informant .
the principle that when two views are possible , that view which is in favour of the accused , applies to the stage of the trial and not at the stage of quashing of the FIR .
therefore , for the present purpose , in my opinion , the FIR prima facie discloses a cognizable offence even under the provisions of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act against the accused persons .
17- Having carefully perused the provision of Section 3 ( 2 ) ( va ) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act and the Schedule &apos; to the Act &apos; , wherein the list of offences is mentioned , I am of the opinion that they also disclose the offence .
18- In the result , I find that there is no case to quash the FIR because the FIR prima facie accounts for the offences against the petitioners .
it cannot be argued that the allegations are absurd and inherently improbable .
if for the sake of arguments , it is assumed that two views are possible with regard to probability and improbability of the allegation , it will be the subject matter of investigation and trial and not the present jurisdiction .
19 . in the result , I do not find any merit in either of the two writ applications .
both are accordingly dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble Samarendra Pratap Singh and Anan Kumar , JJ . Bishan Dass v. State of Bihar Criminal Appeal ( DB ) No. 637 of 2011 . decided on 18th April , 2017 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 302 / 34 — Murder of boy — Common intention — Life sentence — There is consistent evidence of prosecution witnesses that at the relevant time and date , appellant had come to their house with one another and the deceased boy was coined to accompany them — Evidence of witnesses and fardbeyan as well as evidence of Investigating Officer show that deceased was killed within a short time of last seen with appellant — his position : in such circumstances , there was no trial between the prosecution and the appellant , thus , no one can apprehend that the appellant who is his own volition , would kill the deceased merely on suspicion that his mother had played a leading part in the filing of the case by the wife of appellant — There are other circumstances other than last seen — Appellant did not speak of producing evidence , but did not suggest to the prosecution witnesses , that the deceased had any one . taken away and having left the deceased on the way , he was murdered by him — Moreover , the police got blood near the place of occurrence and also on the branch of tree which maintains the place of incident and the manner of incident — Prosecution has not been able to prove the chain of circumstances relevant to appellant &apos;s guilt — Conviction and sentence but amount of fine came to be restored .
case laws . - ( 2002 ) 8 SCC 45 — Relied .
Samarendra Pratap Singh , J. — This appeal has been preferred against the judgment of conviction dated 04.05.2011 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge - cum ITC-I , Bhagalpur , in Sessions Trial No. 585 of 2008 and the sentence dated 7.5.2011 whereby the appellant alone has been convicted under Section 302 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment with a fine of Rs . 5,000 / - .
2- The case of the prosecution , as mentioned in the fardbayan of Babu Lal Das ( PW5 ) , Village Chandramia , recorded at 3.30 PM on 31.10.2007 in the village of Chakia , near Tukuniyur by Sub-Inspector P.N. Tiwari , Police Station , Madhopanpur , is briefly stated in the case as set out in the fardbeyan of village : —
( I ) The informant had stated that on 31.10.2007 , at the day time , his son Shabhou Bishan Dass ( husband of wife ’ s sister ) who was aged about 20 years and was also a resident of Bhoria , came to his house and enticed his six year old grandson to accompany him .
accused Bishan Dass had led his grandson to Tunia Pandhar , where he , along with his friend / colleague Amit Kumar Das , had cut his neck from a palm tree branch ( Dahee ) , which had pointed ends , and killed him in the south eastern corner of the poker and near the palm tree .
his grandson was wept with pain , at which the villagers ran towards him and saw Biswanath Das and Amit Das running away from the spot .
on the locality of the villagers , the informant-in-law , along with his second wife , Gango Devi ( PW-1 ) and daughter - in - law Bisakha Devi ( PW-4 ) and other villagers , ran towards the poker , and found her grandson dead , whose neck was cut off by some sharp edged weapon .
there was a large amount of blood on the ground .
they were also given blood on the branch of a palm tree near the dead body .
( I ) The occurrence had taken place because Bijay Das had a suspicion that his wife Shabnam Devi , having informed the informator and the members of his family , had lodged a criminal case against him in the Police Station , Madhusudanpur .
the wife of the appellant , Sabnam Devi , is a aunt of the deceased Makhan Kumar .
3- On the basis of the fardbayan , the police registered the case number 260 of 2007 against the appellant and one Amit Das under Section 302 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code .
4- During the investigation , the Investigating Officer visited the place of occurrence and after separating the same from the trunk of the tree , he also seized the Branch of the palm along with blood .
the Investigating Officer had given the statements of the witnesses and obtained the post mortem report and submitted the charge-sheet against the appellant and Amit Das under Section 302 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code , finding the matter correct .
on receipt of the charge sheet , the learned Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence and sent the case to the Court of Session for trial .
a charge under Section 302 / 34 IPC was framed against the only appellant whom he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried .
5- As per the statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. as well as in the manner of cross-examination , the case of the defence is of a false implication on account of enmity accepted by the prosecution .
however , in support of his case , the defence neither examined any witness nor adduced any documentary evidence .
6- The Trial Court while relying on the evidence of the informant and other eye witnesses had convicted the only appellant under Section 302 / 34 IPC .
7- The prosecution had examined 12 witnesses to prove its case , namely , PW-1 , Gango Devi is the second wife of the informant , PW-2 is Janardan Mandal which was declared hostile during the course of trial , PW3 Ram Dev Dass is the legendary witness , PW-4 Vesskha Devi is the mother of the deceased Makhan , PW-5 Babu Lal Das and the informant-deceased . PW-6 , Janardan Das is the goitre of the informator , PW-7 Paras Nath Tiwari is the Investigating Officer of the case ; PW-8 Jhalo Devi is the first wife of the informant ; PW-9 Chunachu Das is an independent witness ; PW-10 Dinesh Kumar is an accomplished witness ; PW-11 Sushil Dash is also an hearsay witness and also inquest witness of informant-Babu Lal Das . is it and PW-12 Dr. Arun Kumar Singh who had postmortem on the dead body of the deceased .
8- out of these twelve witnesses , PW-1 , Gango Devi ( second wife of the informant ) , PW-4 , Vesskha Devi ( mother of the deceased ) and PW-5 Babu Lal Das ( informant ) and PW-8 Jhalo Devi ( the first wife of the informator ) , all had stated that on the day of the incident , the appellant — Binod Devi ( the first wife of the informant ) between 2 : 00 to 2 : 30 pm , on the day of the incident , one Amit Das had come to his house and had served Makhan Kumar ( grand son of the informant ) to accompany him to buy biscuits from a nearby shop .
PW4 stated that after some time , he heard the hue and cry that his son was killed , in which she ran towards Tunikur and on the way , she saw Vinay Das and Amit Das running away .
when she arrived at the Tunikor , she found her son lying dead on the ground , having cut injury on the neck .
a large amount of blood had fallen on the ground and the blood stains were stained at the branch of a small palm tree .
9- PW5 ( Informant ) also stated that Shabana Devi had filed a criminal case under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code against the appellant .
in his statement , he has stated that Bishan Dass had caused the murder of Makhan Das , suspecting that his mother , Viso Devi had exhorted her sister ( Shakoni Devi ) to register a case against him .
Janardan Das stated that on 31.10.2007 , between 2 : 00 to 2.30 p.m. , he was in his house .
he had seen Bijay Das taking away Makhan Kumar with him and Amit Das was following him .
PW9 Chunchosen Das had stated that on the relevant day and at about 2 : 00 pm , he had also seen Bachan Dass taking Makhan Kumar to outer side and one Amit Das was also coming behind him .
10- PW12 Dr. Arun Kumar Singh , who had post mortem over the dead body of the deceased , got injuries as indicated by sharp edged weapon on the neck of the deceased .
11- The Investigating Officer of the case , PW-7 Paras Nath Tiwari , had stated that he had received a huge quantity of blood near the place of occurrence where the deceased was found dead .
they had also received blood at the branch of a small palm tree situated near the dead body , which they had separated from the main root and prepared its seizure in the presence of the witnesses .
on these grounds , the prosecution has tried to prove its case and to bring home the charge against the appellant under Section 302 / 34 IPC .
12- Mr. Ahir Kumar alias Sambhani , learned amicus Curiae appearing on behalf of the appellant has criticised the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence on more than one ground .
he submits that there is no eye witness to the incident and the matter is based on circumstantial evidence .
the prosecution has not been able to establish a complete chain of circumstances to prove that it is only the appellant who committed the murder .
the informant ( PW-5 ) and his second wife ( PW1 ) have ignored the prosecution case contained in the FIR .
13- Referring to his submissions , the learned amicus Curiae submits that the informant ( PW-5 ) had stated in the FIR that the appellant Biman Dass had come to the house at the time of the day and had led his grandson to the Tukiya Poet .
after some time , upon hearing the cries of the child , villagers raised a alarm and informed him of the incident which he had run towards the place of occurrence along with the second wife , PW1 and PW4 ( mother of the deceased ) .
but both PW 5 ( informant ) and his second wife , PW 1 had otherwise stated in their evidence .
he stated that the appellant had come and had taken her to the pretext of getting the biscuits from a nearby shop and when the grand-child did not return for an hour , they had searched for him a lot and had gone towards Tukiya Pokhekhar along with the mother of the deceased ( PW-4 ) where they found the child lying dead , with a sharp cut injury on the neck .
they had also found some grass cutting instruments around the place of incident .
PW1 went to the extent of stating that he had seen the accused cutting the neck of the deceased from the branch of palm tree , which is also not the case of the prosecution in the FIR .
learned counsel , therefore , submits that the evidence of PW1 and PW5 is not trustworthy as they have ignored the prosecution case .
14 . the defence also submitted that the Investigating Officer had stated in his evidence that on receiving the information that a boy had been murdered , he made an entry in the station diary and started towards the place of occurrence .
however , no entry of the Station Diary has been produced by the prosecution .
the police did not get any palm - leaf branch or stem which was allegedly cut off the neck of the boy .
15- He further submits that the prosecution party that Bishan Dass had come to the house of the informant-in-law and had taken with him six year old son of PW-4 in his presence and in the presence of the informant , does not appear to be probable inasmuch as Bishan Dass was admittedly aggrieved by the mother and informator of the deceased Makhan Kumar as he had doubt that he was the principal factor in lodging the case against him by his wife .
in such an adverse situation , no one allows Bidhan Das to take Makhan along with him .
16 . contra Mr. Ashwani Kumar Sinha , learned counsel appearing for the State has supported the case of prosecution .
he submits that six prosecution witnesses , namely , PW-1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 and 9 had seen the deceased boy taking the appellant with him on the day of occurrence at about 2.30 pm. at about 2.30 pm .
PWs 4 , 5 and 8 have seen the accused persons running away from the spot after the crime .
the witnesses and Investigating Officer were also given blood near the place of occurrence and also at the branch of a small palm tree with the help of which the boy was cut off neck as the edges are sharp .
17- The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the informant-in-law , while adopting the argument advanced on behalf of the State , submitted that the appellant , Bishan Dass , happened to be the present of the deceased Makhan Kumar , nobody knew that he would kill her , as there was no direct conflict between the prosecution as well as the appellant .
18- We have heard the learned counsels for the parties .
we find that there is relevant evidence of PWs 1 , 4 , 5 and 8 that between 2 : 00 pm and 2 : 30 pm at the relevant time on 31.10.2007 , the appellant , Bishan Dass , had come to their house along with Amit Das and the six year old boy Makhan Kumar had himself tutored to accompany them .
PW6 Janardan Das and PW-9 Chunchana Das had also stated that on 31.10.2007 at about 2 : 00 pm , while they were returning from outside , they saw Bidhan Das taking to Bombay , and one Amit Kumar was coming behind them .
PW4 in his evidence stated that shortly after taking her son of one Bishan Dass , the villagers had raised a alarm and informed him and others that Makhan Kumar has been killed .
on hearing this news , PW4 rushed towards the pond and found his son lying dead near a palm tree .
a large amount of blood had fallen down near the place of incident and there was blood also on the branch of the small palm tree located near the place where the body of the boy was lying .
he also stated that he had seen the appellant and others fleeing from the place of occurrence .
PW-1 , Gango Devi , PW-5 Babu Lal Dass ( informant-appellant ) and PW-8 Jhalo Devi had stated in their evidence that they had also seen the appellant running away from outside after causing the murder of Makhan Kumar .
the police , on receiving such information that a boy has been killed in the village , recorded a diary entry and straightaway proceeded towards the place of occurrence where he took the fardbeyan of PW-5 at 3.30 p.m.
19- Thus , from the evidence of the witnesses and the fardbeyan as well as the evidence of the Investigating Officer , it appears that the girl was killed within a short time of last seen alive along with the appellant Bishan Dass .
20- It is true that in the statement of PW-1 , Gango Devi and the informant-Babulal Das ( PW-5 ) , there are few minor discrepancies in which he stated that when the boy did not return for some time , they started searching and in the course thereof , they had found the son dead near the palm tree and both the accused persons were also seen to run away .
however , the discrepancies are not of the nature which will affect the root of the prosecution case as the witnesses are relevant in this case that they had seen the appellant taking away Makhan Kumar at about 2.30 pm and after committing the crime , they saw him running away with his colleague .
even if we place out of consideration the evidence of the prosecution witnesses , yet there is nothing in the statements of PWs 1 , 4 , 5 and 8 to suspect the veracity of this statement that Bishan Dass had taken away Makhan Kumar from the house on the pretext of getting some biscuits from a nearby shop .
PW-6 had also seen the appellant and Amit Das taking away Makhan Kumar along with him at 2 : 00 pm. on the day of the unfortunate incident .
21- Furthermore , the appellant argued that no one would permit his child to go with a person who has enmity .
we are broadly and generally concur with the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant .
however , the situation in the instant case is different .
there was no litigation between the prosecution as well as the appellant .
thus , in such circumstances , there cannot be any apprehension that the appellant , who is his own son , would kill the deceased merely on suspicion that his mother would have played a pivotal role in the filing of the case by the wife of the appellant .
22 . thus , from the scrutiny of the evidence led on behalf of the prosecution , the following circumstances arise against the appellant : — ( a ) he was seen last time with the deceased — ( b ) by five witnesses , PW-4 , PW-5 , PW-6 , PW-8 and PW-9 on 31.10.2007 between 2 : 00 PM to 2.30 PM , inside , the boy was found dead on the pond bank near a small tree of palm , ( c ) at the place of occurrence and at the branch of the palm tree by which the neck of the deceased was allegedly cut , ( d ) the appellant was seen fleeing from the place of occurrence immediately after the murder of the child by PW-4 , PW5 and PW-8 , the information was received at the spot . he had arrived and recorded the fardbeyan of the informants at the place of occurrence at 3.30 p.m.
23- It would , thus , appear that the boy was killed within a very short time of the appellant taking away by Bishan Dass .
it is true that merely on the last seen theory , no conviction can be supported .
as noticed above , there are other circumstances other than last seen in the present case .
further , it is well settled that the principle of last seen will have application where the time gap between the point of time when the accused and the deceased were last seen alive together is so small that possibility of any person other than the accused being the perpetrator of the crime becomes impossible .
( 2002 ) In the case of Bodh Raj alias Bodha and others reported in ( 8 ) SCC 45 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court observed : “ 31 . the principle of last seen together becomes effective when the time gap between the accused and the deceased being last seen together and the time when the deceased is found dead is so small that possibility of any person other than the accused being an perpetrator of crime becomes impossible .
it would be difficult in some cases to positively establish that the deceased was last seen with the accused when there is a long gap and possibility of other persons coming in between is there .
in the absence of any other positive evidence to conclude that the accused and the deceased were last seen together , it would be dangerous to conclude the finding of guilt in those cases .
24- In the instant case , between the points of time when the deceased Makhan Kumar was taken away by the accused and between his death there was a very short time gap of time much less than one hour .
it is far from being able to produce any evidence , the appellant has not given any suggestion to the prosecution witnesses that the deceased was taken away by some other person and after she had left the path between the deceased , she was murdered .
moreover , the police has got blood near the place of occurrence and also on the branch of the palm tree which nourishes the place of occurrence and the manner of the incident .
25- The case of the appellant that the police did not get any branch of palm removed from the root of the place of occurrence of the incident would not be of any use to him as it is not the case of the prosecution that any branch which was separated from its roots had been used for cutting the neck of the deceased .
26- Having so given the position and in view of the foregoing discussions , we even otherwise find that the prosecution has been able to establish a chain of circumstances relevant to the guilt of the appellant .
accordingly , we affirm the judgment of conviction dated 04.05.2011 passed by the trial Court while convicting the appellant under Section 302 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentencing him to life imprisonment and sentence dated 7.5.2011 .
however , the fine amount is reduced to Rs 2500 / - and in default of payment , he shall undergo simple imprisonment for one year .
the appellant who is in custody remains similarly so as to serve the remaining period of sentence .
27- Accordingly , the appeal is allowed .
Hon &apos;ble V. Nath , J. — Very of the Special Adoption Institute Very vs. Kuljinder Singh Khyala and another Civil Misten No. 395 of 2017 . decided on 4th April , 2017 .
the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2015 — Section 37 — Adoption Regulations , 2017-12 ( 5 ) — Adoption of deserted girl — Decree by Family Court refused to give leave , after issue of NOC certificate by Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CA-A ) and in accordance with procedure prescribed procedure , the child was made over to parents making possible adoption in J.Act , 2015 — the petitioners / bodies as set up under JJ Act , 2015 , have been complied with by the institutions and bodies including the Specialized Adoption Agency as established under JJ Act , 2015 - The findings given by the courts below are clearly based on earlier assumptions , surmises and hypothesis - - impugned order is bad and is not legally acceptable — Order quashed — It will not serve the best interest of remand the case to be reconsidered before the court below as it would not serve the best interest of the child best . the High Court may , in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India , apart from the cancellation of the proceedings in question , under the loving care of the parents , deprive them of an opportunity to rise and live a life of basic human dignity , the impugned order by which the lower tribunal should have been constituted , was adopted to her future parents .
case laws . - 1984 ( 2 ) SCC 244 ; 2017 ( 1 ) PLJR 2857Relied . expenditure or expenditure to the extent of SIGNIZAM
V. Nath , J. — Heard Mr. Umesh Prasad Singh , learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Mr. Sunil Dutt Mishra , Member Secretary , State Legal Services Authority .
who has appeared as amicus curiae in the matter .
2- The present case relates to an proposed inland adoption of an abandoned child where the request for an order of adoption as designed under the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2015 and the adoption Regulations , 2017 has been rejected by order dated 08.02.2017 passed by the Principal Judge , Family Court , Darbhanga , Bihar in 05 of 2017 .
3- In this application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India , an order has been called for quashing the said order and in the facts and circumstances of the case for adoption by allowing the prospective adoptive parents to take the child in accordance with law / Rules / Regulations .
4- In the present application , the petitioner is a specific Adoption Agency , which is allegedly registered under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2015 , in the manner prescribed therein .
on 5 . 8 . 2015 , a newly - born girl child was found on the rail track in Muzaffarpur district by the member team of political services , Muzaffarpur .
the said girl was brought to the Primary Health Centre of the local area for medical treatment and on the same day a child was recorded at the Police Station in the local area .
the said girl was then placed before the Child Welfare Committee , Muzaffarpur , as per the provision of Section 31 of the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2015 ( hereinafter referred to as &quot; JJ Act , 2015 &quot; ) and on the direction of the Committee , the said child was kept in the care of the particular adoptive institution , Khara , Muzaffarpur .
after the registration , the said child was named as Sabu Kumari and it is now stated that after the proposed adoption , her new name is Go Khala .
6- However , after the invalidation of the said agency ( Special Adoption Institute of adoption , Khara , Muzaffarpur ) with the other similar children , while directing the said Bachi Kumari to be kept in the care of the petitioner , who is a specially registered adoption agency of Darbhanga as mentioned above , the Child Welfare Committee passed an order dated 01.12.2015 .
accordingly , the said child Shamu Kumari has been kept in the care of the petitioner .
the Child Welfare Committee , Muzaffarpur , later , by a certificate dated 13.07.2016 ( Annexure P / 3 ) , as per provision of Section 38 ( 4 ) of the J Act , had declared the child Shaklu Kumari lawful to be legally open for adoption to the petitioner agency and the petitioner was permitted to send the application of the child adoption processing and guidance system to the said certificate .
copy of the said certificate was also given to the District Child Protection Authority , Muzaffarpur .
thereafter , the petitioner-agency had prepared the Child Study Report ( CCR ) and Medical Examination Report ( MEER ) of girl child Balu Kumari to facilitate her adoption and sent the same to the Central Adjudicating Resource Authority ( CLA ) under Section 68 of the J Act , 2015 .
7- The parents accepting the prospective adoption , namely , Shri Kingar Singh Khaela and Harray Kaur are citizens of Utopian Kingdom ( as per the CPA present on Annexure-B / 4 ) .
it is apparent from the no - objection letter that the proposal of those who have got their consent in accordance with the law / Rules , expressing their intention to adopt this child was considered by the Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CAPA ) , who issued a no objection letter to the girl child , Shailu Kumari having been retained with the parents who could adopt the said adoption , subject to the legal process as envisaged under Section 59 of the J Act , 2015 . in fact , the language used was simple .
8 . after receipt of no objection letter from the Central Adoption Resource Agency ( CRA ) , the coordinator of the petitioner-agency had filed a petition before the Principal Judge , Family Court , Darbhanga , as per Section 59 ( 7 ) of the J Act , 2015 , which was registered as Misc . adopted case no . 05 of 2017 .
however , the Principal Judge , Family Court , Darbhanga has dismissed Misc . ( adoption ) Case No. 05 of 2017 by the impugned order .
9- There is no need for a civilised society to highlight the importance of child welfare .
however , it becomes of utmost importance in a case where an orphan , abandoned or abandoned child is proposed to be given in adoption to a mother and father adopting a foreign country .
there were no prescribed criteria and procedures to be followed by the Supreme Court in Laxmi Kant Pandey vs. Union of India , 1984 ( 2 ) SCC 244 , where the judges for the first time laid down the principles , parameters and procedures to be followed before such child is given to a foreign parents in adoption .
however , these principles and parameters to be followed were given statutory recognition in the year 2000 when the Parliament came forward and enacted the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2000 .
however , the Act was extensively amended in the year 2006 and thereafter the Rules were also framed laying down the basic principles to be applied in the administration of juvenile justice in pursuance of Section 68 of the said Act .
in respect of any child requires care and protection , in the said Act , the said Act , the said Committee was designed to constitute a Child Welfare Committee in every district , empowered to declare a child to be legally free to adopt any child other than others , and in all matters relating to adoption , the focus was on the predominance of the guidelines issued by the Central Adoption Resource Agency ( CCA ) .
however , the Act was repealed by the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2015 ( hereinafter for short ‘ JJ Act , 2015 ) .
10- In the facts and circumstances of the present case , we have at present to take it from the provisions of the J Act , 2015 which has been made effective on 15.11.2016 .
but before that , it may be noted that the directions which govern the adoption of children were notified on 17.07.2015 providing the mode and procedure for adoption of orphaned , abandoned or children .
subsequently , on January 4 , 2017 , the guidelines as framed by the Central Adjudicating Resource Authority ( CAPA ) under Sections 68 ( c ) and Section 2 ( 3 ) of the J Act , 2015 have been notified fixing the guidelines as framed under Section 68 ( c ) and Section 2 ( 3 ) of the J Act , 2015 .
11- From a perusal of the provisions as contained in the J.J. Act , 2015 , Reference , 2015 and Adoption Regulations , 2017 , it is crystal clear that a separate procedure with specific roles and powers regulating procedure for adoption of an abandoned , handed over or orphan child has been laid down with direct involvement of institutions and bodies established under the JT . Act , 2015 .
statutory bodies and bodies have been clearly established in the process of such adoption to provide special and care including proper legal protection and to also check private adoption through unauthorised persons or agencies .
the District Child Welfare Committee has been entrusted with the primary responsibility of looking after and preserving some abandoned , handed over or orphan child brought before it and has been kept under the supervision of the District Magistrate , who has been made the grievance redress authority for the committee .
as per the provisions of Section 37 of the J Act , 2015 , such Committee has also been empowered to declare a child legally free to adopt .
under Section 29 of the said Act , such a Committee has also been granted authority to deal with all proceedings under the J.J. Act , 2015 relating to children in need of care , protection , treatment , development and rehabilitation of children in need of care and protection .
the functions and responsibilities of the Committee have been described further in Section 30 of the said Act .
further , it may also be significantly mentioned that under Section 27 ( 9 ) of the said Act , the Child Welfare Committee is authorised to act as a Bench having the same powers as are conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate or , as the case may be , the Judicial Magistrate of the first class .
12 . apart from having the jurisdiction to declare children legally free for adoption , the J Act , 2015 to facilitate and regulate the process of rehabilitation of an orphan , abandoned or dedicated child through adoption , to give recognition to institutions or organizations as specialized adoption agencies , to establish and adopt a State adoption resource agency ( SRA ) and to constitute a Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CRA ) . also design .
these agencies and authorities apparently have been well defined in the Act and the guidelines , 2015 and the Adoption Regulations , 2017 for protecting the interest of such child and providing the most suitable rehabilitation .
provision has also been made for recognizing , supervising and supervising the functioning of the agencies and statutory bodies relating to the adoption process .
despite the completion of the adoption process and the release of the child ’ s country with the parents in adoption , a process for continuous monitoring the child ’ s welfare has been prescribed which includes a specific role of the Indian diplomat in this regard .
13- But the procedure for adoption of a child requiring protection and care is not complete without an order of the Court as per Section 59 ( 7 ) of the J Act , 2015 , which requires an order of adoption to be obtained from the Court by filing an application in the prescribed manner for the particular adoption agency .
Section 61 of the said Act prescribes following procedure in this regard : — “ 61 . procedure and order of Court against payment in consideration of adoption . — ( 1 ) Before issuing an adoption order , the Court shall satisfy itself that ( a ) the adoption is for the welfare of the child ; ( b ) the child is made to wish to have due importance regard to the age and understanding of the child ; and
( C ) in the consideration of the adoption , except as allowed under the Regulations made by the authority for adoption fee or service charges or child care material , no payment or gift has been made or agreed to be given , or to be given , to the future adoptive parents , nor the parents or guardians of the child , relatives , in the event of adoption , received or agreed to .
( 2 ) The adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and the case shall be disposed of by the Court within a period of two months from filing .
14- Though in the instant case , on behalf of the petitioner-specialized adoption agency before the Court on 12.12017 , as required application under Section 59 ( 7 ) was filed when the direction to conduct adoption was in force but within one week of the filing of the said application , the Central Government had notified the adoption regulations , 2017 which came into force on 16th January , 2017 .
from a perusal of the Adoption Regulations , 2017 , it is clear that the procedure and parameters prescribed in the Guidelines , 2015 have been fundamentally and more consistently reiterated .
from the provisions therein , it is also clear that in exercise of the power conferred by Section 68 ( c ) of the J Act , 2015 , the Regulations as framed by the Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CAPA ) will govern the present case , 2017 .
however , while deciding the Miscellaneous ( Adoption ) Case No. 05 of 2017 on this important aspect , the learned lower court has not been noticed .
15- One of the particular features introduced by the Adoption Regulations , 2017 , is the stipulation as contained in Regulation 12 ( 5 ) which requires any adoption case to be excluded , where the petitioner - specific adopt agency is not to be a party as respondent in the adoption petition .
the territorial jurisdiction of the court is also prescribed in Regulation 12 ( 1 ) .
as the court will have jurisdiction over the place where the particular adoption agency is located .
in the instant case apparently the petitioner-specialized adoption agency is situated within the territorial jurisdiction of the learned lower court where an application as envisaged under Section 59 ( 7 ) of the J . p . Act , 2015 has been filed .
though , Bachi Shaku Kumari was found to be released in another district , namely , Muzaffarpur and initially by an order of the Child Welfare Committee , Muzaffarpur , it was kept under the care of the Specialized Adoption Agency of Muzaffarpur , but later on by an order dated 01.12.2015 , the Child Welfare Committee , Muzaffarpur , after the recognition of the said particular adoption agency , came to be cancelled , with the other children . the petitioner — Specialized Adoption Agency , was directed to transfer to the care and custody of Darbhanga .
it is apparently done in pursuance of the direction as contained in the letter dated 23.11.2015 issued by the Director , Social Welfare Department , Patna , which is apparent from the order dated 01.12.2015 of Child Welfare Committee ( Annexure P / 2 ) .
a certificate ( Annexure P / 3 ) of the Child Welfare Committee , which declared statutorily free to adopt child Shamu Kumari , has also been repeated in the certificate dated 13.07.2016 .
the learned lower court has ignored these facts available on record while recording a finding on territorial jurisdiction in the impugned order against the petitioner and has apparently been influenced by the fact that Bachi Shaku Kumari was found abandoned in Muzaffarpur district .
16- As mentioned above , a Child Welfare Committee , a specialized adoption agency and the jurisdiction , powers and functions of the Central Adoption Resource Authority have been statutorily prescribed and validated by JT Act , 2015 , subsequently in the adoption Regulations notified , 2017 .
thus , in view of the provision of Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act , a legal presumption can be raised that the acts committed by these Committees , agencies and authorities have been performed regularly according to law .
such a presumption can be revoked only by clear and cogent evidence available on record .
apparently , there is no such material or strong circumstance on record to lead to the inference that the orders / certificates of the Child Welfare Committee or the act / measures taken by the Petitioner - specific adoption agency or NOC issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CAPA ) has come in with mala fide .
this Court , therefore , is unable in the impugned order to be consistent with the findings and observations of the learned lower court at various places that the certificate granted by the Child Welfare Committee declaring the child to be legally free for adoption has been received by the petitioner-specialized adoption agency .
in view of the materials available on record indicating that the child Shaklu Kumari was kept by order of the Child Welfare Committee under the care of the petitioner-specialized adoption agency , this Court is again unable to maintain the conclusion that the petitioner - specific adoption agency , knowing the same to be misguided by the biological parents of the said child and deliberately brought the said child with mala fide intention .
in this regard , the learned lower court has also ignored the guideline number 6 ( 11 ) which was in force on 30.07.2016 when the Child Welfare Committee had declared the child &apos;s welfare committee legally open for adoption to Bachi Kumari , who in the matter of an abandoned child under two years of age , the presumption is provided for the non-detection of the biological parents after the detection of the children .
17 . the intention of the petitioner-parents adopting any possible adoption to the Court below has also shown inconsistency in the work of the petitioner-specialized adoption agency to the girl child Balu Kumari and has held on the ground that the intention of the petitioner-specialized adoption agency was mala fide from the inception .
but before reaching this conclusion , the learned lower court has ignored the stipulated guidelines no . 17 ( 2 ) and the Adoption Regulations no . 16 ( 2 ) that the parents making future adoption may , after issuing NOC by the central adoption authority in the prescribed form , take the child to an adopted pre-host for a temporary period after the declaration of no objection certificate by the Central Adoption Resource Authority .
since no Objection Certificate was issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority ( CRAA ) , and as per the procedure prescribed , Bachi Shlu Kumari was handed over to the parents making future adoption , this Court is again unable to maintain the finding by the learned lower court that the petitioner - specialized adoption agency acted with mala fide parents to make the said child .
18 . at this stage , while emphasizing the adoption of a child friendly attitude in the decision making and disposal of cases in the best interests of children , and their rehabilitation through the procedures provided and the institutions and bodies established thereunder , it would be relevant to take note of the Preamble to the J . p . Act , 2015 integrating the object and goal of the Act .
also Section 40 of the J . p . Act , 2015 also recognizes that the restitution and protection of the child being the principal object of any specialized adoption agency would include the restitution of such child to the parents adopting therein .
in Section 68 of the J Act as well as in Regulation 37 of the Adoption Regulations , 2017 , the powers and functions of the Central Adoption Processing Authority ( CRAA ) have been prescribed , which include functions to be performed in cases of inter domestic adoption besides issuing NOCs .
the petitioner-specialized adoption agency has brought on record the same by attaching the documents as prescribed in the main application as well as the supplementary affidavit .
it is clearly reflected by these documents that all the prescribed procedure has been followed for facilitating the domestic adoption of the girl child Shaklu Kumari by the future adoption of the mother , Shri Kulindesh Singh Khyala and Harray Kaula .
moreover , an affidavit annexed to the supplementary affidavit executed by the principal functionary / authorised person of the petition-specific adoption agency is also in support of the adoption of Bachi Kumari alleging relevant facts .
from documents / orders / certificates annexed to this application and the supplementary affidavit filed therein , nothing appears that institutions , bodies under J Act , 2015 have not discharged their duties and functions as prescribed under J Act , 2015 or the Adoption Regulations , 2017 .
nothing is mentioned in the impugned order to lead to such an inference or conclusion .
19 . in view of the aforesaid facts and contentions , it is clear that the procedure prescribed in the JT Act , 2015 and the Adoption Regulations , 2017 govern the adoption of children by institutions and bodies including the petitioner-specialized adoption agency as set up under JT Act , 2015 .
the findings given by the learned lower court are manifestly based on conjectures , surmises and hypothesis and there is complete absence of material on record to support these findings .
20- In the result , this Court decides that the impugned order is bad and is not legally tenable .
accordingly , this application is allowed and the impugned order is quashed .
21- This Court , after quashing the impugned order , would normally have remitted the matter to be considered afresh .
however , keeping in view the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner and also with the object underlying in view of the decision on behalf of the petitioner to adjudicate matters in the best interests of children and adopt a child friendly attitude for their rehabilitation through prescribed procedures , this Court is of the considered opinion that it is not the best interests of the child to remit the matter for reconsideration before the learned courts below . it will not do so because it will deny him an opportunity to be won over under the loving care and supervision of his parents and to live with basic human dignity .
in view of the aforesaid facts , reasons and debates , this Court is inclined to accept the proposed adoption of the girl child Shaku Kumari .
as held by a Division Bench of this Court in State of Bihar Land Development Bank Committee vs. State of Bihar , 2017 ( 1 ) PLJR 285 , this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India may , besides cancelling the proceedings in question , also substitute the impugned order by an order which the lower tribunal should have done .
22- Thus , after allowing the present application in the final circumstance and quashing the impugned order , the miscellaneous adoption case no . 05 of 2017 is allowed and now a necessary order is passed to give the parents as proposed in the said Miscellaneous Case to adopt the child Shaklu Kumari as named in the said Miscellaneous Case .
the institutions and bodies concerned are directed to be dealt with accordingly under the Act .
23- Accordingly , this application is allowed in the above terms .
Hon &apos;ble Virendra Kumar , J. in Ram Lalit Singh vs. State of Bihar and others Crl . W.JC No. 410 of 2016 . decided on 11th April , 2017 .
Criminal Procedure Code , l973 — Section 156 ( 3 ) — Prevention of Corruption Act , 1988 — Section 13 — Reference for police investigation — Referring of fraud with public exchequer — Magistrate may order investigation under Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. which will conclude with police report submitted under Section 173 Cr.PC — However , cognizance referred to under Section 202 Cr.P.C. is definite . — Such investigation follows and is of limited nature — only to satisfy / decide whether there is sufficient ground for Magistrate to proceed further — Magistrate after taking cognizance of offence on complaint case cannot order investigation under Chapter XII of Cr.P.C. , in the present case , Magistrate after receiving complaint petition had entertained the same and applied his judicial mind to proceed with the matter — by the court below had taken cognizance of the offence on complaint petition — Courts below were completely incapable of passing impugned order by which police was directed to lodge FIR on the basis of same complaint petition — Impugned order is not maintainable in law and liable to be set aside — Impugned order is suffering from non-application of judicial mind as Special Judge directed to institute FIR on private complaint without prior sanction for prosecution — Criminal proceedings quashed —
case laws.7 ( 2006 ) 1 SCC 627 ; ( 2010 ) 4 SCC 185 ; ( 2009 ) 6 SCC 576 ; ( 2013 ) 10 SCC 75Relied . 62
Birendra Kumar , J. — This is writ application under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order dated 21.10.2014 passed by the learned Special Judge , Monitoring , North Bihar , Muzaffarpur , in the complaint case no . 72 of 2013 , whereby a direction has been given to the Superintendent of Police , Station House Officer , Patna , to lodge an FIR against the petitioner and other guilty persons and to report the matter .
2- A complaint petition ( complaint case no . 72 of 2013 ) was filed by respondent No.6 Sudhir Kumar Oza under Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act , with the averment that the petitioner was posted as Primary Health Centre , Sakara for 33 years .
he was transferred to Primary Health Centre , Katra vide order of Civil Surgeon dated 06.06.2009 .
however , the petitioner did not attend the Primary Health Centre for duty at Katra and was away from duty between 07.06.2009 to 12.07.2010 .
subsequently , by collusion with the staff of the Directorate of Health , Patna and Civil Surgeon , Muzaffarpur and the authorities , the petitioner had obtained salary for the aforesaid period of his non-appearance by filing a false affidavit thus playing fraud with the public exchequer and involved in misappropriation and misappropriation of public money thereby causing loss of revenue to the State .
the aforesaid complaint petition was filed on 15.05.2013 and on 17.5.2013 the learned lower court passed the following order under Annexure 2 : &quot; the complainant has a hanjari &quot; .
on the call , the complainant appeared along with his advocate .
they requested to rule the libel letter and check the facts mentioned in the complaint letter from some competent office .
heard .
he reviewed the complaint letter and annexures papers .
the prayer was accepted .
upon submission of copy of complaint letter and documents by the complainant , forwarding the certificate of enquiry to the Superintendent of Police , Vigilance Bureau , Patna for submission of the enquiry report .
the complainant is directed to file a copy .
a copy of the complaint letter and document was filed by the complainant .
office Superintendent of Police please forward the inspection Bureau to Patna .
advance proceedings for 19.06.13 .
3- Thereafter , a preliminary report of the Superintendent of Police , Vigilance was received and the impugned order has been passed .
4- Learned counsel for the petitioner on two grounds has rendered the impugned order as bad .
( I ) In the first place , on the ground that the Magistrate once started an inquiry under Section 202 CrPC , he had no power to direct the police to institute a FIR and ( ii ) no public servant can be prosecuted under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act on a personal complaint without previous sanction and in the present case there was no previous sanction .
the learned Special Judge by the impugned order had not applied his judicial mind while directing the institution of the FIR .
5- Though the respondent No.6 was legally served with a notice , none is present on his behalf .
the respondent no.2 has filed a counter affidavit on behalf of the Surveillance Bureau , but nobody has appeared to cross - examine the matter .
6- It is the submission of the petitioner that such complaint filed on the initiative of a private person , in absence of valid sanction to prosecute the petitioner , who is a public servant and against whom there is a charge of corruption under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act , could not have been acted upon .
it is also argued that the learned Special Judge , monitoring , who was exercising the power of a Judicial Magistrate , after taking cognizance of an offence under Section 190 ( i ) ( a ) Cr.P.C. , that is , after receiving a complaint of that fact he constitutes such offence , cannot invoke the powers conferred under Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C.
further argument is that after taking cognizance of the offence under the procedure prescribed under Chapter XV of CrPC , the learned Special Judge , Monitoring could not turn back to the pre — cognizance stage and could not direct the police to institute the FIR .
7- Learned counsel for the State respondents submits that apparently the complaint petition is manifesting a cognizable offence against the petitioner as there has been sufficient disclosure of embezzlement of public money by the petitioner , holding public office .
more than that , the intended and wilful act of the petitioner is apparent from the fact that he , instead of not paying any contribution to duty , withdrew the salary in the office by collating in his office for the period of his absence from duty .
therefore , for technical reasons , the criminal prosecution of the petitioner at the initial stage cannot be faulted .
8- In ( 2006 ) 1 SCC 627 , Mohd . Yusuf vs. Afaq where ( Smt ) and another , reported in ( 2006 ) 1 SCC 627 , the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court has dealt with the distinction between investigation under Chapter XII of Cr.P.C. and investigation under Chapter XV of Cr.P.C.
paras 6 to 10 of the judgment are relevant for this purpose .
hence , these are reproduced hereinbelow : “ Section 156 ( 1 ) falling under Chapter XII relates to the power of police officials to investigate cognizable offences .
the investigation envisaged in Section 202 , contained in Chapter XV is different from the investigation contemplated under Section 156 of the Code .
7 . Chapter XII of the Code contains provisions relating to information and their powers to investigate the police , whereas Chapter XV , which contains section 202 , relates to the provisions relating to measures which have to be adopted by a Magistrate while taking cognizance of an offence on a complaint or thereafter .
the provisions of the said two chapters deal with altogether two different aspects , though there may be a shared factor , namely , a complaint ﬁled by any person .
Section 156 falling under Chapter XII relates to the power of police officials to investigate cognizable offences .
it is true that Section 202 , which falls under Chapter XV also refers to the power of the Magistrate to direct the investigation to be carried out by a police officer .
but , the investigation design in section 202 is different from the investigation contemplated in Section 156 of the Code .
8- The various steps to be taken for investigation under Section 156 of the Code are modified in Chapter XII of the Code .
such investigation shall commence with the entry of the substance of information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence in a booklet to be kept by the officer in charge of a police station .
the investigation commenced thereafter may end with the report submitted by the police as pointed out in Section 173 of the Code .
the investigation contemplated in that Chapter may be commenced by the police even without the order of any Magistrate .
provided that it does not mean that when a Magistrate orders an investigation under Section 156 ( 3 ) , it will be a different kind of investigation .
such investigation is also to end with the report contemplated in Section 173 of the Code .
but the important point to be noticed is that when a Magistrate orders investigation under Chapter XII , he does so before taking cognizance of the offence .
9- Provided that no Magistrate is required to order any such investigation if he intends to take cognizance of the offence .
once he takes cognizance of the offence , he has to follow the procedure designed in Chapter XV of the Code .
a reading of Section 202 of the Code makes it clear that the investigation referred to therein is of a limited nature .
the Magistrate may direct any such investigation to be made by any police officer or by any other person .
such investigation is only to assist the Magistrate to make a decision as to whether he has sufficient ground to proceed further .
this may be understood from the words occurring at the end in section 202 ( 1 ) , namely , “ or by a police officer or by any other person whom he thinks fit ” to be investigated .
or not there is sufficient ground for the purpose of judging whether there is a sufficient cause for proceeding .
10 . this is because he has already taken cognizance of the offence disclosed in the complaint and thereafter the jurisdiction of the case shall vest in him .
9- In the case of Rameshbhai Pandurao Hedau vs. State of Gujarat reported in ( 2010 ) 4 SCC 185 , the same question was dealt with in paras 23 to 25 of the judgment which are as follows : — 23 Mohd . Yusuf vs. Afaq where ( 2006 ) 1 SCC 627 also referred to the decision of this Court , where it is held that when a Magistrate orders investigation under Chapter XII of the Code , he orders investigation . does so before taking cognizance of the offence .
once he takes cognizance of the offence , he has to comply with the procedure envisaged in Chapter XV of the Code .
the investigation contemplated under Section 202 ( 1 ) or by a police officer or by any other person is only to assist the Magistrate to decide whether there is sufficient ground for him to proceed further , on account of the fact that the offence disclosed in the complaint had already been taken by him , but the issue of process was adjourned .
24- The law is well settled that the investigation ordered by the Magistrate under Chapter XII is a pre-cognizance stage and an order made under Section 202 and / or investigation takes place at the post — cognizance stage .
which we have to deal with .
that is whether the Magistrate committed any error by urging the appellant to be investigated by the police under Section 156 ( 3 ) of the Code and in its place by taking recourse to Section 202 of the Code , as both the roads were available to them .
25- The power of the police authority to direct investigation to the Magistrate is under Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. as well as under Section 202 Cr.P.C. .
the only difference is that of the stage at which the said powers can be invoked .
as pointed out earlier , the power to direct any investigation by the police under Section 156 ( 3 ) CrPC is in the pre-cognizance stage , whereas under Section 202 , the power to direct such investigation lies in the post-knowledge stage .
10 . ( 2009 ) 6 SCC 576 considering his power to recall an order passed by a Magistrate under Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. in the case of Dharmabhai Vasudevbhai &amp; Ors . Vs . State of Gujarat &amp; Others reported in ( 2009 ) 6 SCC 576 , the Supreme Court observed that before taking cognizance , the Magistrate can invoke his powers under Section 156 ( 3 ) but take cognizance once , 11 . the above referred cases make it clear that a Magistrate may order investigation under Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. which will conclude with the police report submitted under Section 173 CrPC including the power to investigate or investigate .
however , the investigation referred to under Section 202 CrPC definitely takes place after taking cognizance and is of a limited nature .
such investigation is only to satisfy / decide whether there is sufficient ground for the Magistrate to proceed further .
the Magistrate cannot order investigation under Chapter XII of the Cr.P.C. after taking cognizance of the offence on the complaint case .
12- In the case at hand , the learned Magistrate ( Special Judge , Monitoring ) , after receiving the complaint petition , had entertained it and applied its judicial mind to proceed with the matter which would emerge from the order dated 17.05.2013
hence , by necessary implication , the learned Court below had taken cognizance of the offence on the complaint petition .
therefore , the learned court below was totally incapable of passing the impugned order by which the police was directed to lodge the FIR on the basis of the same complaint petition .
for the aforesaid reasons , the impugned order is not warranted in law and deserves to be set aside .
13- I find myself in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned order suffers from non-application of judicial mind as the learned Special Judge without previous sanction for the prosecution had directed to institute an FIR on a private complaint .
learned counsel placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Anel Kumar and others vs. M.K. Ayyappa and others reported in ( 2013 ) 10 SCC 705 .
in para 11 of the judgment , the Supreme Court observed thus : &quot; the ambit of Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. came up for consideration in several cases before this Court .
this Court had examined the requirement of application of mind by the Magistrate before exercising jurisdiction under Section 156 ( 3 ) in the case of Maqusta Sayyid and held that where jurisdiction is exercised on any complaint filed in terms of Section 156 ( 3 ) Cr.P.C. or Section 200 , the Magistrate is required to use his mind , in any such case , without any valid sanction to the Judge / Magistrate , a case cannot be referred to under Section 156 ( 3 ) .
the application of mind by a Magistrate should be reflected in the order .
the mere statement that he has seen the complaint , the documents and heard the complainant thus , will not be adequate for the reason that this order is reflected in the order .
after observing the complaint , documents and hearing the complainant , whom the Magistrate had attached importance in order to investigate under Section 156 ( 3 ) CrPC , it should be reflected in the order , though a detailed expression of his view is neither required nor proper .
we have already placed the order passed by the learned Special Judge in which , in our opinion , no reason has been stated to order the investigation . &quot;
14- Admittedly , in the present case the complaint by the private person was not with any admission order as required under Section 19 ( 1 ) of the Prevention of Corruption Act .
hence , in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Anneal Kumar ( supra ) , the learned Special Judge , Monitoring , North Bihar , Muzaffarpur could not have entertained and proceeded with the complaint .
15- For the aforesaid reasons , the order dated 21.10.2014 passed in the complaint case no . 72 of 2013 by the learned Special Judge , Monitoring ( North Bihar ) , Muzaffarpur is set aside and accordingly the entire criminal proceeding arising out of the aforesaid complaint case is also quashed .
16- This writ petition is , accordingly , allowed .
Hon &apos;ble Ajay Kumar Tripathi and Neeloo Agarwal , JJ . State of Bihar &amp; Ors . vs Muzaffar Hasan LPA 720 / 2014 , CCJC No. 11598 of 2012 . decided on 22nst March , 2017 .
Bihar Pension Rules , 1950 — Rule 43 ( c ) — Bihar Service Code , 1952 — Rule 97 ( 3 ) — Prevention of pension and gratuity as penalty — Prosecutor has to first prove guilt — No evidence whatsoever was presented on behalf of presenting present-office bearer — No single Judge had rightly interfered with impugned order to stay of 100 % pension , however , Rule 43 of quashing of order of penalty order — ( iv ) The terms of reference should not include issue of ten per cent of pension and 100 per cent of gratuity — Even otherwise so far as penalty for staying salary for a period of suspension is concerned , compliance of procedure laid down under Rule 97 ( 3 ) of Service Code is to be carried out which was not done — Appeal dismissed .
case laws . - 2006 ( 4 ) PLJR 514 ; 2017 ( 1 ) PLJR 575 — Relied . on behalf of the learned Principal Additional Advocate General / and the learned counsel representing the private respondent .
2- The order dated 29.10.2013 passed in CWJC No. 11598 of 2012 is the subject matter of appeal before this Court .
the learned Single Judge , after taking considered opinion on the materials available and the submissions , decided to quash Annexure-13 to the writ application dated 31.01.2012 , on the basis of which two punishments have been set aside for withholding 100 % pension of the private respondent and not paying the salary for the period of suspension .
that is the reason why the State is aggrieved .
3- The fact is not a matter of dispute that the private respondent was arrested under surveillance to demand a bribe of Rs . 2000 / - .
it is alleged that she was caught red - handed with money , for which inspection case number 11 of 2008 was instituted .
the delinquent had been arrested and was later released on bail but the authorities also decided to conduct departmental proceedings against him and on completion of the departmental proceedings , he was ordered to be punished .
4- The private respondent had filed a writ application challenging the order of punishment primarily on the ground that the so called findings of guilt by the Inquiry Officer are not based on any evidence whatsoever .
in fact , no such proper inquiry was conducted .
no evidence was led in the departmental enquiry and he was declared guilty only on the basis of first information report and allegations made in the FIR and 100 % of his pension was stayed .
5 . in so far as this aspect of the matter is concerned , in order to be fully convinced , the Court had summoned the original record pertaining to the departmental proceedings .
after perusal of the records , this Court has no hesitation in recording that the departmental proceedings were not conducted in the manner laid down in the prescribed and as amended till now in the Bihar CCA Rules , 2005 and only one superficial work was done by the Inquiry Officer , on the basis of which an order to hold 100 % pension was passed .
6- An attempt was made on behalf of the learned Principal Additional Advocate General , representing the State , that the accused had admitted the fact that someone had placed Rs . 2000 / - in his pocket and this amounts to accepting his guilt , which was sufficient to punish him or convict him .
with due respect to the learned Principal Additional Advocate General 1 , it has to be said that he is trying to turn the law upside down on his head .
the prosecution has to first prove the guilt and it is not that the burden can be displaced on the delinquent merely because it was stated that it had forcibly put Rs . 2000 / - in his pocket .
7- The records do not show that any such evidence was produced on behalf of the presenting officer or that the evidence in the order of the Inquiry Officer has been discussed .
merely because Investigating Officer reaches the conclusion without the essential material being present , no one can be declared guilty .
hence , the learned Single Judge has rightly interfered with the impugned order of stay of 100 % pension .
8- However , this Court may be considered as Principal Additional Advocate General —
it is agreed with that quashing of the order of penalty , in terms of Rule 43 ( c ) of the Bihar Pension Rules , the State should not come on the way to stay 10 % of pension and 100 % of gratuity by the State .
now in view of the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Vijay Kumar Mishra Vs . State of Bihar and others reported in 2017 ( 1 ) PLJR 575 , such a submission of the State appears to be valid .
hence , the part of the order of the learned Single Judge that 100 % pension or gratuity is required to be exonerated in favour of the private respondent is required to be set aside or modified .
9- The other punishment was for staying the salary for the period of suspension .
even here , the State authorities committed an error in imposing such a punishment as in the case of Dinesh Prasad vs. State of Bihar and others reported in 2006 ( 4 ) PLJR 514 a Division Bench of this Court has already held that if such punishment is required to be inflicted , then the procedure laid down under Rule 97 ( 3 ) of the Bihar Service Code is to be complied with .
one reason has to be a query and an opportunity to be given followed by an order .
since none of these procedures was followed , the learned Single Judge has also quashed that part of the order of punishment which , in the opinion of this Court is supported by the law laid down by the High Court .
10- In view of the above , the appeal is dismissed with the modification as indicated in the preceding part of the order .
Hon &apos;ble Virendra Kumar , J. Narendra Bhushan Vs . State of Bihar &amp; Ors . Cri.WJC No. 432 of 2016 . decided on 4th April , 2017 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 498 and 506 read with Sections 166 and 166A by public servant Criminal intimidation — FIR does not prima facie constitute offences alleged against petitioner and offences under Sections 498 , 506 and 166 of Indian Penal Code are non-cognizable offences and since offence under Section 166A of Indian Penal Code is not prima facie applicable against petitioner , there is no justification for investigation of this case by police — Prosecution Court of Criminal Court is not guilty — abuse of process and it is accordingly quashed — Criminal writ application allowed .
case laws.- 1992 Supp ( 1 ) SCC 335 . — Advocates , lawyers , M / s . , Kumar , J. — Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned A.G.Pleader No. 9 appearing on behalf of the State respondents .
2- The petitioner has placed reliance on the writ jurisdiction of this Court to quash the FIR No. 8 of 2016 dated Madhuban Nagar Police Station Case No. 8 of 2016 registered under Sections 498 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code .
subsequently , offences under Sections 166 and 166A of the Indian Penal Code were added .
3- Respondent No.2 , Trisha Chakraborty , had filed an application before the District Magistrate co - Chairman , District Health Committee , Madhubani stating therein that the notice was posted in Sadar Hospital , Madhubani on the basis of contract on 20.02.2014 .
she received the salary for the month of August , 2015 .
however , he has not been paid wages for the last four months because this petitioner , who was then Civil Surgeon , at that time , had given an oral order staying the salary of the provision of notice till re - verification of the certificate of ground setting .
the said order was passed by the petitioner inspite of the fact that the certificates of the furnishing of notice had already been verified by the previous civil surgeon and the same were found to be correct and genuine .
the informant had called upon the District Magistrate to clear the salary as he was facing difficulty .
on the same petition , the District Magistrate had ordered the institution of FIR against the petitioner and accordingly the FIR has been registered .
4- Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that on a bare perusal of the FIR , much less speak of the alleged offences , no offence is made out .
hence , criminal prosecution against the petitioner is an abuse of process of law and it infringes the fundamental right of the petitioner .
5- despite service of notice , none had appeared on behalf of opposition no.2 .
the State respondent has filed a counter affidavit giving details of the procedure for appointment of the opposition no.2 as a professional jurist .
in the counter affidavit , it is stated that one Urja Kumar on the basis of the inclusion of Ms. Trisha Chakravarty , respondent no.2 in the select list had filed property on the ground that Ms. Trisha Chakravarty had not submitted any experience certificate .
the said properties were disposed of by the Committee on 20.02.2014 and , accordingly , the appointment letter was issued in favour of respondent no.2 .
it is also stated in the counter affidavit that in the light of the reference in the case of Vishakha , the FIR was registered .
however , learned counsel for the State respondent failed to explain that there is any allegation of sexual exploitation against the petitioner along with opposition no . 2 .
6- In 1992 Supp ( 1 ) SCC 335 , certain instances were mentioned in State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal to deal with any matter of quashing of a criminal prosecution , the relevant instances are being reproduced hereunder : —
( 1 ) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint , even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused .
( 2 ) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials , if any , accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence justifying an investigation by police officials under Section 156 ( 1 ) of the Code except an order of a Magistrate within the ambit of Section 155 ( 2 ) of the Code . &quot;
7- The relevant criminal provisions of the offences alleged under the Indian Penal Code are reproduced below : 498A , into luring , or detaining with criminal intent a married woman . — Any woman who is the wife of another male and whom she knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of another male , has or to take care of her with that person or with any person on her side . shall take , or cause to be enticed , with intent to commit intercourse with any person , or with this intention conceals or detain any such woman , shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years , or with fine , or with both .
506 . punishment for criminal intimidation . — Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years , or with fine , or with both .
if a threat be to cause death or grievous hurt , etc . — and if the threat is to cause death or grievous hurt , or to cause the destruction of any property by fire , or to cause an offence punishable with death , or with imprisonment for life , or with imprisonment for a term of seven years , or to impute the correctness of a woman , with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years , or with both ; or shall be punished .
166 . public servant disobeying law with intent to cause injury to any person . — Whoever , being a public servant , knowingly disobeys any direction of law in the manner in which he is to conduct him as a public servant , intending or knowing it to be likely that by such disobedience he will cause injury to any person , shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year , or with fine , or with both . it will be done .
166A . a public servant disobeying a direction of law which being a public servant , ( a ) knowingly disobeys any direction of law prohibiting him from requiring his attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation in any offence or any other case ; or
( b ) any other direction of the law regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation , knowing it to be likely that he disobeys any person , or
( C ) any information in respect of a cognizable offence punishable under sub-section ( 1 ) of section 154 , the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 ( 2 of 1974 ) and under section 326A , section 35B , section 35B , section 35B , section 370 B , section 376A , section 376B , section 376B , section 376D , section 376D , section 376E or section 509 ; fails
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years , and shall also be liable to fine . &quot;
8- The bare perusal of FIR does not prima facie constitute the offences alleged against the petitioner .
more than that , the offences under Sections 498 , 506 , 166 of the Indian Penal Code are non-cognizable offences and since an offence under Section 166A of the Indian Penal Code is not prima facie applicable against the petitioner , there is no justification for the police to investigate this case .
consequently , it would be an abuse of the process of the criminal prosecution court .
accordingly , the same is hereby quashed and the criminal writ application is allowed .
Hon ’ ble Ashwani Kumar Singh , J. — Sree Narayana Guru vs. State of Bihar and another Cri.MIC No. 30519 of 2013 . decided on 6th April , 2017 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 323 and 498A — Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 — Sections 177 , 178 and 482 — Injury and cruelty — Deceased of female — daughter of complainant died within territorial jurisdiction of Naenda District , for which a police case was registered in Nalanda , Sharif in Bihar under Sections 304-B and 328 / 34 of Indian Penal Code , namely , criminal report has already been filed in police case of Nausinda setting a false charge . territorial jurisdiction of a court with regard to an offence is to be decided on the basis of place of occurrence — In case in hand , offence was allegedly committed at Nalanda in a case where dead body of his deceased daughter was also met by complainant — alleged offence cannot be said to have been committed wholly or partly within local jurisdiction of Court of Magistrate of Patna City — Judicial Magistrate first class , Patna City to summon the petitioner to take cognizance of offence and face trial . grave error was committed : set aside the impugned order and dismissal of the complaint case .
advocate . - Mr . Saifers , Furniture No.Pester , FY &amp; amp ; 36 , Mer . , JJ . - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner , learned counsel for the State and learned counsel for opposition no.2 .
2- In C.A. Case No. 179 of 2009 this application has been filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure ( for short , Cr.P.C. ) to cancel the order dated 10th July , 2009 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate first Class , Patanagar , whereby , on seeing a prima facie case under Sections 323 and 498-A of Indian Penal Code , the petitioner has been summoned to face trial .
3- According to the complainant-- opposite party no.2 , his daughter Amrita Devi alias Badu Devi was married to petitioner Narayan Gobind in the year 2003 .
at the time of marriage , the petitioner was given gift both in cash and in kind .
later , her daughter had gone to her matrimonial home where she was meted out cruelty on account of non-fulfillment of demand of dowry , on 17th December , 2008 the complainant received a telephonic message regarding ill-health of her daughter and when she along with her family members went to in-laws of her daughter , she found the lock of the house and the accused persons were absconding .
on inquiry from the residents of the locality , he came to know that his daughter was lying dead near the primary school located in the village .
he immediately went to the place where dead body of his daughter was lying .
he suspected that his daughter was killed by the accused-petitioner by giving poison to her .
4- In the complaint it is stated that the information of the case was immediately furnished to the local police but since no action was taken by the SHO of Police Station , the complainant had kept her grievance before the DSP and S.P. Nalanda .
5- Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that all the allegations made in the complaint are false and concocted .
he submitted that in respect of the alleged incident Urmila Devi wife of the complainant had made a fardbeyan before the police , pursuant to which , on 18.12.2008 under Sections 304-B and 328 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code , the petitioner as well as his father Chander Kalan was registered as Police Station Case No. 145 of 2008 .
he argued that on investigation , the police found the allegation false and accordingly , on 1st March , 2009 , a final form was filed in the police case in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate , Biharif and only thereafter , a complaint submitted on 06.03.2009 has been filed concealing the fact that the FIR was already instituted and on investigation , the police found the allegation to be false .
6- Learned counsel for the petitioner has also criticised the order on the ground that in dealing with the matter , the learned ACMM , Patna City was wholly devoid of territorial jurisdiction .
7- On the contrary , learned counsel for O.P. No.2 submitted that the complainant of the case was a labourer and the police case being an illiterate person was not aware of the institution of the police case and its result and the complaint presented was filed .
he submitted that no fact has been hidden because the complainant has disclosed everything in the complaint petition that the information was given to the police and when no action was taken against the accused persons , a complaint was also made to the Local D.S.P. and S.P. , Nalanda .
however , accept that the learned ACJM , Patna City was not having any territorial jurisdiction over the matter and to that extent the order of cognizance cannot be upheld .
8- Similarly , the learned Additional Public Prosecutor Mr. Jharkhandi Upadhyay also admits that the impugned order passed by the learned ACJM , Patna City is bad in law .
9- I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record .
10- There is no dispute with the facts of the case .
admittedly , the daughter of the complainant died within the territorial jurisdiction of Nalanda district for which a police case was instituted under Sections 304 - D and 328 / 34 of the Indian Penal Code , from Nalanda , Bihar .
it is also an admitted fact that in the police case of Nalanda , the police have already filed final reports setting false charges .
11- Though the parties agree that the learned ACJM , Patna City had no territorial jurisdiction to pass the order summoning the petitioner to face trial , it would be appropriate for this Court to refer to Sections 177 and 178 of the Cr.P.C. which are as under : “ 177 The inquiry and ordinary place of trial . — Every offence and trial would ordinarily be conducted by such court within the local jurisdiction . “ has been done ” .
“ 178 . place of enquiry or trial . — ( a ) where it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was committed , or
( b ) where the offence is partly committed in one local area and partly in another , or
( C ) where the offence is a continuing one , and continues to be committed in more local areas than one , or
( d ) where it consists of several acts done in different areas , it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas . &quot;
12- reading the aforesaid sections would make it clear that Section 177 of the Cr.P.C. provides a common place of enquiry or trial whereas when it is uncertain in which of several local areas the offence was committed or where any offence was committed partly in one local area and partly in another , and where it included several acts to various local areas , in such local view of Section 178 Cr.P.C. it can be enquired into or tried by any Court having jurisdiction over any of them .
the territorial jurisdiction of a court in relation to criminal offence is , thus , to be decided on the basis of the place of occurrence of the incident .
in the instant case the offence was allegedly committed at Nalanda where the complainant was also found dead body of his deceased daughter .
therefore , the alleged offence cannot be said to have been committed wholly or partly within the local jurisdiction of the Magistrate of Patna City .
13- In this view of the matter , I am of the considered opinion that the learned Judicial Magistrate , first class , Patanagar , committed serious error in taking cognizance of the offence and summoning the petitioner to face the trial .
accordingly , the impugned order dated 10th July , 2009 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate first Class , Patanagar in C.A. Case No. 179 of 2009 is set aside .
consequently , the CAT case is quashed under 179 year 2009 .
14- The application is allowed .
Hon &apos;ble Virendra Kumar , J.
Versus State of Bihar &amp; Ors . Cri.J.No. 692 of 2015 . decided on 23rd February , 2017 .
Indian Forest Act , 1927 - Section 52 — Constitution of India Article 226 and 227 — Appeal to release of truck loaded with wooden poles of year — Vehicle from vehicle of petitioner has been seized and authorities are able to do confiscation or otherwise order under Section 52 of Indian Forest Act , 1927 , after hearing the petitioner in exercise of power under Section 52 of the Indian Forest Act , 1927 — Section 59 of the Act is capable of being confiscated or otherwise . in appeal under appeal , there is an opportunity to challenge it , Magistrate has no delay in informing the matter with any mala fide intention — For this reason , impugned proceedings cannot be said to be bad — Since notice has been given to petitioner in mandatory proceedings , petitioner is free to maintain his grievance before concerned authority which will pass a reasonable order — Statutory remedy available with petitioner — High Court is not willing to exercise extraordinary jurisdiction — Criminal writ application dismissed .
advocate : - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Government Advocate for the State .
2- This application has been filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for an issue of a writ in the nature of certiorari setting aside the confiscation Case No.1 of 2013 pending before the Chiel Forest Officer , Araria .
the prayer is for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to take immediate leave of the Van bearing WB59A / 8401 linkage with 57 wooden poles in favour of the petitioner who is their owner .
